

HOMŒOPATHIC THERAPEUTICS OF DIARRHŒA, DYSENTERY, CHOLERA, CHOLERA MORBUS, CHOLERA INFANTUM, 

AND ALL OTHER LOOSE EVACUATIONS OF THE BOWELS 

BY 

JAMES B. BELL, M.D. 



" Science is a complement of knowledges, having, in point nf form, the character of logical perfection, and, in point of matter, the oharacter or real truth." — Sir Wm. Hamilton. 

t PUBLISHED BY BOERICKE & TAFEL. r YORK : I SAN FRANCIi 

SAN FRANCISCO: 

No. 145 Grand Street. 

No. 234 Sutter Street. 







8433^ 

1870 

fiJi^y} '))[ , lotf-OO , H .. 

Ktitered according to Act of Congress, in the year lseo, by 

A. J. TAFKL, 

In the Clerk's Office of the District Court of the United States in and for 

the Eastern District of Pennsylvania. 

/VjfifS^ J- rAOAN * SO", '"' *4l? STKREOTYPKRS, PHILAd'A. fcxSjS^'*' 

PRINTED BT 



PREFACE. 

I HIS little work was prepared for my own use, as a labor-saver, and as a receptacle for clinical ovations, and for gleanings from others and q the periodicals. 

¦as been the work of odd moments; and little nts of time, redeemed from busy days. 

EiVen the young physician, of a single summer's erience, must have felt the want of such a k, particularly when dealing with the frently occurring and obstinate diarrhoeas of ins. It was the difficulty of treating these, that awakened the desire to possess in one little k all that was known of our Materia Medica pplied to loose evacuations of the bowels. 

Eias not been intended to include every remat has been known to purge, but only every t of which enough is known, either of its or conditions, or concomitants, to distinguish i any other remedy. 

¦some may inquire, Why should diseases of wels be honored above others by a special raph ? 

iii 



lhose who have Bcenninghausen on Cough, on Fever, and on Headache, will not ask this question, but will desire that the work go on until we possess such special aids in the treatment of all affections that most tax the busy practitioner. 

The present work is now printed because colleagues, who had seen it, desired to possess a copy — one going so far as to copy it himself, — because Mr. Tafel, who had seen it, desired to print it, and because the work had already repaid me for the time and labor it cost, in the same coin, and I was therefore happy to believe that it would be of like use to others. The clinical test will be found to disclose many valuable symptoms not to be met with elsewhere, and, alas, also, doubtless, many errors. 

Eie carefully collated experience of ten active i, which it contains, would indeed be better ey were twenty or thirty, but perhaps the . in his goodness will permit this to be added 

E would be a grateful task to indicate throughle work, the sources from which many valuymptoms were drawn, but this would detract its practical character as a work of reference. 

Augusta, Feb. 21st, 1869. 

James B. Bell. 

4 





6 

INTRODUCTION. 

CHARACTER AND OBJECT OF THE WORK. 

THIS work is intended to apply to all loose evacuations of the bowels, and to describe them, their aggravations and ameliorations, with their immediate accompaniments and general accompanying synip- 

¦ character of the stool is used as an adjective, er it the word " stool " is always to be under- The semicolon stands for it. 

Eder the head of aggravations and ameliorations influences are given which affect the stool, and hose which act as exciting causes of the attack, i referring to other symptoms, they will be found ,ted in parenthesis. 

¦ concomitants of the stool have been studied served with much care. 

¦general accompaniments include all the syniplat occur during the attack. 

¦sr each of the be^st known remedies, some ms will be found italicised. These, it will be ood, are th 3 symptoms which have been most 



sharply distinguish that remedy from others. The more of these emphasized symptoms we have under any one remedy, the easier the selection. The sooner we are able by careful observation to emphasize symptoms under all our remedies, the more we shall perfect our art. It should be the self-appointed task of every Homoeopathic physician, to confirm, and define, and add to, the symptoms of all our remedies, but more especially of those that are but little known. Many of that class will be found in this book, some of which have many symptoms of clear and distinctive character, derived from provings, but whose relative and positive value awaits clinical determination. If those who use this book will add the fruits of their observations, by underlining and writing-in symptoms, they will be gladly incorporated in a future edition, should any be required. 

B remarks, which follow nearly every remedy, oe understood as embodying only the personal s of the writer, whether confirming or conng what may have been published by others, ped that they may sometimes aid in the seof the remedy, but they are of wholly sub-3 authority to the text. 

THE SELECTION OF THE REMEDY. 

All who subscribe to the law of similars, agree that the problem in each case is to find a reme- 

6 







One class thinks the solution is found in a similitude to the pathological state. If able to diagnose hyperaemia, hyperassthesia, ulceration, plastic exu-^ dation, atony, atrophy, hypertrophy, and so on through the catalogue, this seems to them sufficient. They have then only to diagnose a remedy producing a similar state. This has a great fascination for some excellent minds, because it seems to utilize the splendid developments of Allopathy in this direction, and connect them directly with therapeutics. 

Another, and growing class, believes that those who stop here will never comprehend the true genius of Homoeopathy. The demand for exactness, minuteness, and delicacy of observation in all branches of science was never greater. The same is true of Homoeopathic Therapeutics. Those who are ardently following in this direction, soon discover that the selection of the remedy requires, so to speak, two similars, viz., one corresponding to the general symptoms, or those which bring it into relation to the pathological state to be treated, and one corresponding to the special and characteristic symptoms, or those which bring it into relation with the individual case to be treated. 

To illustrate: a patient has stools consisting of bloody mucus, small and frequent, with tenesmus. We diagnose dysentery ; hypereemia and inflammaudation 

7 





01 blood, and secretion of mucus. Forty four volunteers stand ready, armed and equipped with a similar pathological condition. But we want but one, and how shall we learn which one ? We must be more exact, and discover that our patient has restlessness, dry heat, and much thirst. Our volunteers are now reduced to three ; but still too many. Applying our magnifying-glass again, we observe a recent exposure to cold, dry wind, and a flushed face becoming pale, with faintness, on rising, and now we have the man we want. 

Eiecomes evident, therefore, that the individualsymptoms possess the greater value, and are, I, indispensable to a certain selection. 

It should be noticed, further, that these distinguishing symptoms are of all kinds and qualities, from the most purely objective and pathological, to the most subjective and delicate complaints which the organism is capable of uttering. As instances of the former may be cited, the green frothy stools of Magn. c, the dark acid urine of Benz. Ac, the blue varices of Mur. Ac, and of the latter, the aggravation from hearing water run, of Hydroph., from sudden depressing emotions, of Gels., and the relief, from cold food and drink, of Phos. 

E whatever the character of these symptoms, particular, it is to be observed that they are evjr obtrusive enough to thrust themselves he notice of an unobserving man, and that 

8 







This mode of diagnosing the remedy is also in exact accordance with that pursued in other sciences. The chemist would be thought hardly worthy of his title, who should attempt to recognize arsenic by its cruder properties of color, weight, or taste. He must be familiar with its most delicate and characteristic tests and reactions. He does not ignore the other properties, yet it is only after applying the characteristic tests that he will give an authoritative decision, and on these he will rely, even in cases involving weighty questions of human guilt or innocence. 

But now the question arises, and it is a very important and practical one : suppose we find that the only remedy for a given case, that corresponds to the peculiar and individualizing symptoms, is one that has never been known to cause the pathological state under which our patient suffers. The answer is, that we may safely infer that the remedy does possess also the general and organic symptoms of the case, and that it will remove them, together with the distinguishing indications. 

Thus has our Materia Medica been enriched by at least one fourth of the most positive and valuable pathological symptoms which we possess. Thus, for example, have we learned that Bry. Ars., Rhus., Bap , etc. have ulceration of Peyer's glands in their pathogenesis ; that Hep., Lach., and Lye. produce pseudo-membranous exudation ; that Spong. causes 

9 





fuul cures plastic cnolo-carditis i or tout ft iact now published for the first time and obtained purely by observing the characteristic symptoms) Puls., and Sep. are known to cause and cure trachoma or granular conjunctivitis. 

I some affect to sneer at this method, and only time ago the author had the honor to acquire iable title, because he had observed the power oph. to cure true pneumonia when selected by haracteristic symptoms, although it has never nown to produce that condition. 

Yet here, too, we are following closely the example of the chemist, who from the yellow band in the spectrum is able to assert that there is sodium in the sun, or from the lines in the spectrum of the Diirkheim spring-water, is able to declare that a new metal is there. He does not hesitate to attribute form, weight, malleability, and other metallic properties to the stranger, long "before he is able to possess himself of a little bar of Indium. 

Our conclusion, then, is, that the problem of selection is solved by seeking the remedy which possesses the physical and diagnostic symptoms of the case, and which corresponds also to the special, distinguishing, and peculiar symptoms which mark the individual case. And, further, if a remedy is found that possesses distinctly the latter symptoms, but not, so far as is known, the former, we may conclude safely that it does possess the former, and administer it with conndjnce. 

10 





THE ADMINISTRATION OF THE REMEDY. 

¦he present state of our science upon this each can only contribute the fruits of his )servation. 

The writer began the practice of medicine with the pi'econceived idea strongly fixed in his mind, that, while the thirtieth potency might be useful and perhaps the best for chronic and nervous affections, the lower and even crude preparations would prove more satisfactory for acute affections and particularly for diseases of the bowels. 

¦ experience has taught him the contrary, and " convinced against his will," he is not " of c opinion still." 

Be is indeed a somewhat prevalent opinion, c strength of the dose makes up for want of c or knowledge in selection. 

¦ may be stated in mathematical terms as folif the thirtieth potency of Ars. is equal to a te knowledge of the drug, one-fifth of a grain nious acid is equal to complete ignorance of ated in this, its true form, we grant it. 

¦onally, our experience has been most satisfacith the use of the twelfth, fifteenth, thirtieth, ndredth,* and often higher potencies, of our 

• The two hundredth proves more useful than anything lower, and we prefer it, but, until recently, many valuable remedies were 

11 





one to six hours according to the urgency of the symptoms, and suspended as soon as decided improvement appeared. If the same remedy was needed to be resumed again, it has seemed to do better in a higher potency, but on this point we cannot yet speak with entire assurance. 

We have not been able to perceive that age or sex or habits, (we might add color, race, or order in natural history,) form any element in the choice of the dose. All classes have been found to respond favorably to the high potencies. As regards temperament, we cannot speak with equal positiveness, but we have no certain testimon} r proving it to form an 

Note. — The question of diet is foreign to this work, but we cannot resist recording our testimony against the prevalent abuse, of starving infants and young children on arrowroot and other starch. They must have bread and beef. The latter is best assimilated in the form of an extract prepared in vacuo, by some reliable house.* Raw beef is next to be preferred, if the other cannot be obtained. The juice running out of a rare roast is also excellent. Ordinary beef-tea requires too high a temperature, in its preparation, coagulating the juices. 

* That prepared bj T Tourtelot Bros., of Chicago, has given us the 

12 





2 

13 



PART I. 

THE REMEDIES AND THEIR INDICATIONS. 

1. ACONITE. 

Stool: Watery; Bloody, slimy, mucous; Small; Frequent; (dysenteric stool.) 

¦ravation : In summer, with cold nights : After * wet: After being overheated: After exposcold, dry wind, or a draft: After anger or 

•lioration: After eating warm soup — (pains.) re Stool: Cutting pains: Nausea and sweat. 

During Stool: Cutting pains ; Tenesmus. 

¦r Stool : Relief, except from nausea and sweat, may continue. 

Accompaniments: Anxiety; fear of death. Restlessness; Vertigo or fainting on rising up, with paleness, face flushed when lying. Bitter taste of everything except water. Lips dry, dark. Unquenchable thirst. Nausea. Vomiting: of blood; of 



with profuse sweat and urine. Sensation of a cold stone in the stomach. Distended abdomen sensitive to the touch. Violent pains (cutting) in the ab- 

¦splessness. General dry heat. Full, hard, very pulse. Internal shuddering, with dry, hot md tendency to uncover. Sweat on the covarts. 

Aeon. is only useful in the very beginning of acute diseases of the bowels, but is then often able to cut short dysentery, and even cholera morbus, without any other remedy. 

2. -dSTHUSA CYNAP. 

Stool: Bilious, light yellow, and greenish (liquid); Green mucous; Bloody mucous; 

¦"avation : In the morning (after rising) : In n : In summer : During dentition. 

¦>re Stool : Pinching and cutting pains in the en. 

Bng Stool : Tenesmus, often violent. 1 Stool : Unsatisfied urging to stool. 

Accompaniments : Irritability, bad humor, especially afternoons and in the open air. Sensation as though the head, and other parts, were in a vice. Face pale or flushed, altered ; collapsed, with an expression of anguish. Constant thirst. Violent vomiting of curdled milk ; of greenish mucus ; of frothy milky-white substance. 

14 





Eor. Spasms: thumbs clenched; eyes turned pupils fixed, dilated ; eyes staring ; foam at th; red face; locked jaw; pulse small, hard, ick. Drowsiness with chilliness. Great pros- 

jEthus. is suitable to a severe form of cholera infantum. It will usually be hardly able to complete the cure alone, but will need to be followed by an antipsoric ; most frequently by psor., sep., or sulph. 

3. AGARICUS. 

B: Thin, yellow, fecal, and slimy ; Watery ; vation : In wet weather: (general condition.) 

Before Stool: Pinching and cutting in the ab- 

¦ng Stool : The pains continue, with nausea, nation in the abdomen, emission of much flalinful drawing in of the stomach and abdoimarting in the anus. 

After Stool : Smarting in the anus. 

|>mpaniments: Mental excitability. Vertigo morning ; in the open air ; in the bright sun. coated tongue. Acrid, offensive smell from >uth, like horseradish. Passage of much flaiclling like garlic. Sleepiness in the daytime, 

There has been but little clinical experience with agar. in diarrhoea. It resembles natr. sulph. in its symptoms. The absence of the morning aggrava. tion in the former, is a marked distinction. 

15 





4. ALOE. 

El : Yellow fecal ; Bloody, jelly-like mucous ; ish, greenish, or bright yellow bilious ; Gray; Jndigested; — Involuntary; {when, expelling or urine.) Small ; (dysenteric stool.) 

Iravations: In hot, damp weather: In the afterevening, and night: After acids (vinegar): hagrin : After overheating : After a cold taken amp room : From motion : When walking or ig : After eating : When passing urine. 

¦lioration : From ale: (pains in the anus.) By g double and by passing flatus, (colic). 

Ire Stool : Urging, violent, quickly passing, Lt, with feeling of fulness and weight in the Colic: Burning and prickling in the intes- Pain around the navel: Much flatus. 

¦ng Stool : Urging : Cutting and tearing in lomen extorting cries : Hunger : Heat in the and anus : Tenesmus: Much flatus. 

¦' Stool : Burning, weight, and itching in the Large and prominent haemorrhoids, tender, ieved by cold water : Cutting about the navel nes continues. 

Accompaniments : Dissatisfied and angry about himself when in pain. Lips red, and tongue dry and red, with much thirst. Generally, good appetite. Desire for juicy things ; apples ; beer. Aversion to meat. Bitter taste. Pain in hypochondria, with painful weakness in the legs. Heat, fulness, pres« kiivp anrl tf»nrl arnica in fVio nV»rlr\m£>n anc\ rerti in nf 

16 





17 

THEIR INDICATION'S. 

the liver. Griping pains in abdomen, relieved by bending double, with urging to stool, nothing but flatulence being passed. Much flatulence moving about in the abdomen. Pain in bowels after eating. Loud gurgling in the abdomen as of water running out of a. bottle. Distended abdomen. Flatus smells very badly, and causes burning in the rectum. Urine generally profuse. Chilliness when leaving the fire. 

Bes is one of our most valuable remedies for liarrhcea and dysentery. The symptoms are i and unmistakable, as given above. Con;o what might be expected, the peculiar gurin the abdomen is often found with the dysenteric stool, when aloes is indicated. The good appetite is most frequently met with among children. The haemorrhoids differ from those of brom. in the relief from cold water. 

5. ALUMINA. 

Stool: Thin fecal ; Expulsion difficult; 

ligravation : After constipation : After dinner : r lead-poisoning : During typhoid fever : In dry her : When walking : On alternate days : (gen« condition.) 

¦ioration : After short sleep : From warm apns: (colic.) 

Before Stool : Colic 

Kg Stool : Colic : Tenesmus : Burning in the Involuntary urnation. 



B 



mi 11* • .I i i n j* CUII I I II U.t!o ¦ .1 11 1 (JHHJI II li 111 tIJtJ UatK • OUltJllc&o Ul clllUo. 

Accompaniments : Seriousness. Changeable mood. Reeling vertigo in the morning, with faintness or nausea. Appetite for chalk, starch, clean white rags, charcoal, cloves, acids, ground coffee, tea-grounds, dry rice, and other unnatural and indigestible substances. Faintness at the stomach, relieved by satisfying the depraved cravings. Violent colic. Urine can only be passed with the stool. General debility. Chlorosis. 

Alum, is sometimes useful in acute diarrhoea, and, possibly, dysentery, when the difficult expulsion of stool and urine exist. It is more frequently indicated in chronic diarrhoea accompanying chlorosis, with the depraved appetite and the aggravation on alternate days. With these symptoms, a brilliant cure may be expected, including the chlorosis, if the remedy is not given too low, and too frequently. 

6. AMMON. MUR. 

Stool: Green, thin, mucous, (slimy); Yellow fecal and slimy ; 

¦avation: In the morning: During the menses: leals: During the day: Walking in open air: •) 

Before Stool : Violent urging : Pain about the 

During Stool: Tenesmus: Burning in the rectum. 

After Stool : Tenesmus : Pain in abdomen, and soreness as if bruised: Burning in rectum. 

18 





limpaniments : Fretfulness. Bitter taste in mth, and bitter eructations passing off after something. Loss of appetite. Nausea, after and when walking in the open air. Pinching imen, hindering inspiration. Much rumbling ission of flatus. 

I[. m. is useful for chronic diarrhoea occurring the menses, when the other symptoms cor-1. Many of the symptoms resemble those of but are milder. The green mucous stool may it useful in infantile diarrhoea, but experience, se in this affection, is yet wanting. 

7. ANTIMON. CRUD. 

¦I : Watery ; Often profuse ; Alternating with ation ; 

¦avation : After acids, (vinegar, sour wine) ; verheating: After bathing : After cold water food : In aged persons : During pregnancy : it : Early in the morning. 

Before Stool : Cutting pains. 

¦ng Stool : Pain in the rectum : (Protrusion of turn) 

Accompaniments : Sentimental or distrustful mood. Children cannot bear being touched or looked at. Ptyalism, with saltish taste. Thirst, worse at night, Tongue coated white. Violent vomiting : bitter; of bile ; of slimy mucus : renev)ed on taking food or drink. Desire for acids. Frequent and profuse 

19 





The gastric symptoms of antimon. crtjd. pre« dominate. The vomiting differs from that of aeon., ars., verat., and other remedies, in the absence of severe thirst, and in the white-coated tongue. From want of attention to these distinctions, this remedy is often overlooked when it would bring speedy re- 

8. APIS MEL. 

V: Greenish, yellowish, slimy mucous; Yelery; Yellow fecal ; Clear (colorless) watery ; mucous; (mixed with fecal.) 

Bsive (watery stool) ; Painless (slimy mucous); itary, with every motion, as though the anus pen (yellow fecal and slimy) ; 

Frequent ; 

Aggravation : In the morning : From acids : In the warm room : From motion. 

¦ing Stool : Urging : Griping : Tenesmus : d feeling in the intestines. 

After Stool : Rawness in the anus. 

Accompaniments : Inability to fix the thoughts on any subject. Pain in the eyeballs and forehead. Tongue dry, shining. No appetite. Little or no thirst. Nausea. Vomiting of bile, or thin, bitter 

Tenderness of the abdomen felt when sneezing, or upon the least pressure. Burning in the abdomen. Frequent and profuse urine. Strangury. Labored respiration. Disturbed sleep, with muttering. 

20 





Hands blue. Emaciation. Indescribable feeling of weakness. Anasarca. Ascites. 

Apis, deserves further clinical observation, particularly in infantile diarrhoea, and cholera infantum. Here it is one of our precious remedies, corresponding to a low and dangerous condition. The absence of thirst, existing with a dry tongue and dry, hot skin, is sufficiently striking to prevent confounding it with other remedies with similar stools. When oedema is present, it will be most frequently found in the feet and genitals. 

9. ARGENTUM NIT. 

¦I: Green mucous; Dark, watery mucous ; ; Bloody mucous ; Brown liquid ; Frequent ; (green mucous and brown liquid) ; Scanty, r mucous) ; Painless, (bloody mucous) ; 

Eravation : At night; after midnight: After freely of sugar: After breakfast: During on: Early in the morning: After eating, (pains 

¦lioration : After eating, and after acid food, a). 

Before Stool : Colic 

¦ng Stool: Colic: Urging: Emission of much latus. 

¦>mpaniments : Head feels as though in a vice, unken face. Lips and mouth dry and viscid, ittle or no thirst. Desire for sugar in the j. Teeth sensitive to cold or acid sub. 

21 





stances, with constant dull grumbling. Nausea, with loud eructations. Violent vomiting of glassy tenacious mucus, capable of being drawn into threads. Sudden stitches through the abdomen on moving. Cannot bear pressure of clothes about the hypochondria. Much flatulent colic. Uneasy sleep. Tremulous weakness. Debility, felt mostly in the legs. ' nll ii ness. 

Blen and severe attacks of cholera infantum, le characteristic stools, in children who are nd of sugar, and who have eaten too much of find their remedy in argent, nit. 

10. ARNICA. MONT. 

Stools : Slimy mucous ; Brown fermented, (like yeast) ; Undigested ; Bloody ; Purulent ; 

Sourish smelling ; 

Frequent ; Small ; Involuntary, (during sleep) ; 

Aggravation: After mechanical injuries: From motion : From lying on the left side : In typhoid fever : During gastric fever. 

E> m pa ni merits : Bitter or putrid taste. Averfood ;to meat. Desire for vinegar ; for Frequent eructations ; often fetid. Vomitwhat has been drunk. Distention of the ab- Fetid breath. Weakness, obliging one to n. 

Arnica, has not a wide application in bowel affections, but the symptoms are clear, and the selection easy. The marked gastric derangement is peculiar _, ... 

22 







Rls : Thick, dark green mucous ; Slimy mv« Brown mucous ; Bloody ; Dark or black, or fluid ; Yellow watery ; Purulent ; Undi- I 

¦vent; Scanty; Involuntary; Corrosive; Of-3 (watery or fluid stools). Painless, (watery » 

R'avation : At night : After eating or drinking : lidnight: After taking cold: From cold food, er or ice-cream: During dentition: From From fruit : From acids : During smallpox : typhoid fever : After abuse of alcohol. 

¦>re Stool : Chilliness : Anxiety : Cutting in en : Vomiting : Thirst. 

¦ng Stool : Chilliness : Nausea : Vomiting : vis : Burning in anus and rectum. 

Efter Stool : Relief : Burning in anus and rectum : mulous weakness, obliging one to lie down : Pallion of the heart : Perspiration. 

Accompaniments: Great restlessness ; anguish ; constantly changing place. Fear of death, or of being left alone. Face pale, earthy, deathlike, yellowish. Blue rings around the eyes. Lips black, dry, cracked, or blue and cold. Tongue dry, black or brown, cracked. Aphthae. Bloody saliva. Violent, unquenchable, burning thirst, with frequent drinking of small quantities of water. Desire foi acids, cold water or spirits. Loss of appetite. Bitter t-i t I*l tViO lVi tilt i"Vi O "fYiiT* oofinni A - i-l«* 1 * ~\T "/ 

23 





lor black substances ; of blood ; of green or -green mucus ; of bile ; of thick, glassy mucus ; iolent pains in the stomach, and burning in h and abdomen. 

Dry heat. Great weakness ; fainting ; rapid exhaustion. Very rapid and scarcely perceptible pulse. Emaciation. 

There is reason to fear, that, as routine is easier than study, arsenicum may have accomplished more harm than good in the hands of homoeopathic practitioners. No remedy has been more frequently given in acute affections of the bowels, while it is not the most frequently indicated, and it is not a remedy to be unwisely used. The symptoms which most clearly distinguish it from other remedies with a similar totality, are the characteristic thirst and restlessness. These two must be present, as a general rule. The mucous stools are not usually offensive ; the watery ones are very much so, and often pain- 

12. ASARUM EUROP. 

¦Is : Tenacious mucous ; Shaggy masses of of resinous appearance ; Scanty, yellow, mucous ; 

Piravation : In chilly, nervous individuals: From :y : During hectic or slow fever. 

Amelioration : After vomiting : (pain and dulness 

24 





Lead. Cannot bear the sound of scratching on linen or any similar substance. Food tastes bitter. Much empty retching. 

Scanty vomiting of greenish, sour liquid. 

13. BELLADONNA. 

¦Is : Thin, green mucous ; Bloody mucous ; ar yellow slimy mucous ; White mucous ; 

¦II ; Frequent ; Involuntary ; Sour smelling ; 0 

Rravations : Afternoon : After sleeping : After cold : After taking cold from cutting the In hot weather: During typhoid fever: From 1 : From pressure (colic) : 

Amelioration : From bending double (colic) 

¦re Stool : Perspiration : Heat in the abdo?olic: Pinching and contractive griping. 

During Stool : Shuddering: Tenesmus: Nausea. 

After Stool : Tenesmus. 

Eompaniments : Head hot. Easily startled. £ the head from side to side. Delirium ; during sleep or just after ; desire to get out of • into another one. Stupor. Lethargy, with old face, or flushed face. Children cry much, *c very cross. Tongue dry, and red at the or has two white stripes on a red ground, sin. No*, much thirst but desire to moisten 

3 

25 





luth often. Mouth open. Constant chewing. on to food ; to meat, beer, acid things. Al> distended and tender. Profuse urine. Involurination. Partial or general spasms, with ciousness, renewed by contact or bright light, at. Quick, hard, small pulse. 

Sleepiness with restlessness ; starting up suddenly. 

The pains appear and disappear suddenly. 

Belladonna will be found suitable for children more frequently than adults. It is often the only remedy required for severe cases of infantile dysentery. The drowsiness, with startings, dry heat, and frequent drinking, may be regarded as characteristic, if the other symptoms of the patient correspond. 

14. BAPTISIA TINCT. 

Ktools:K tools: Consisting of pure blood. Bloody mu-5; Frequent ; Dark, thin fecal ; 

Aggravations : In hot weather : In the autumn : During typhoid fever. 

Before Stool : Colic, more in the hypogastrium. 

During Stool : Tenesmus. 

After Stool : Tenesmus. 

Accompaniments : Nausea, with thirst. Dry tongue. Pain in the region of the liver, and particularly of the gall-bladder ; worse on walking. Fever slight, pulse soft and full. Sleeplessness ; or sleep with heavy, tiresome dreams. 

fJAPTisiA is one of the remedies requiring further ving and clinical observation. It seems to be 

26 





15. BENZOIC ACID. 

¦)1s : Watery, white, or light-colored ; Copious ; )ffensive ; Frothy bloody ; 

Aggravation: In children: During dentition. 

Before Stool: Chilliness. 

During Stool : Urging. 

¦mpaniments : Urine very strong smelling ; dark. Much exhaustion. Weakness. Pern. Cold sweat on the head. 

The symptoms of benz. ac. are not many, but they are genuine jewels. The offensive stools are not like those of any other remedy. The smell is strong, pungent, urinous, somewhat like that of the characteristic ifrine, which is also almost invariably 

16. BORAX. 

¦s : Light yellow, slimy, mucous ; Green mui'requent; Yellow watery ; 

¦•avation :In nursing infants : During dcnti- From fruit (apples, pears) : After breakfast: hocolate: After eating: Afternoon: Evening. 

Before Stool: Peevish, lazy, dissatisfied: Urging. 

Kng Stool : Burning in the rectum. 1 Stool : Cheerful, contented mood. 

Accompaniments : Easily startled at sudden noise. Anxious feeling during downward motion or rocking. Hot head. Pale, clay-colored face. Hot 

27 





'6 o * wrinkled, with screaming when nursing. Loss of appetite, (loathing of the breast in infants.) Desire for sour drinks. 

Vomiting of sour slime (after chocolate). Distention by flatulence after every meal. 

Pinching in the abdomen. 

Frequent urination, preceded by cries. 

Kting from sleep with anxious screams, throw-3 hands about, seizing things, or clinging to )ther. 

Palms hot. Emaciation; flesh relaxed. Skin pale 

Belladonna has, doubtless, been often given when borax should have been. The anxious feeling on downward motion is the chief distinction between them, and is peculiar to borax. 

17. BOVISTA. 

Stools : Liquid, yellow, fecal ; 

Kavations : Early in the morning : In the evenit night : Before the menses : During the 

Before Stool : Urging : Colic. 

During Stool : Twisting pains in abdomen. 

Kfter Stool: Tenesmus : Burning at anus: Lanr. 

Accompaniments : Nausea in the morning ; better 

28 





much flatus. 

18. BROMINE. 

Stools : Black fecal ; Light yellow, slimy mv- 

¦avation : After a meal : After oysters : After At night. 

¦lioration : From black coffee : After eating, a and pains in the stomach.) 

During and after Stool: Blind, intensely painful varices ; worse from application of cold and warm water; better after wetting with saliva. 

Btmpaniments: Desire for acids. Nausea, on to habitual smoking ; it causes nausea and ». Emptiness in the stomach. Contractive of the stomach passing off after eating. Great r and debility. 

EDr two cases of bromine diarrhoea, in its ristic totality, are as many as can be ex;o fall to one physician during a lifetime. t one is yet to come to the writer. Should ravation after oysters, however, become more nfirmed, it will need to be used more fre- 

19. BRYONIA. 

Stools : Brown, thin fecal ; Thin, bloody ; ITndi- 



29 





like rotten cheese ; Putrid ; Alternating with constipation. 

I'avation: In the morning: In hot weather: ver the weather becomes warmer: At night: uppression of exanthemata : During typhoid : ;aking cold : After cold drinks : After taking From sitting up, (nausea, &c.) : From mo- 

Before Stool : Colic : Cutting pains : Nausea. 

During Stool : Burning at anus : Vomiting : Thirst: Drowsiness: Chilliness. 

After Stool : Heat: Drowsiness. 

Accompaniments : Desire for things which do not exist, or which are refused when offered. Peevishness. 11l humor. Delirium. Desire to get out of bed and go home. Talking of the business of the day. Dry, swollen, cracked lips. Tongue dry and red or brown, or white or yellow. Thirst for large quantities at long intervals. Bittei taste in the •mouth, and of food. Nausea and fainting on silting up. Desire for cold drinks, wine, coffee, sour drinks. Vomiting of bitter substances, of yellow-green mucus. 

Desire to lie down and remain quiet. 

Bryonia has not been one of the routine remedies for loose discharges from the bowels, nor is it desirable that it should become so, or that that list should be enlarged. It is, however, quite often indicated, and if administered according to the above symptoms, will not fail to repay the careful chooser. 

30 





20, CACTUS GRAND. 

Bis : Bilious ; Watery ; Mucous ; ndant ; Frequent ; 

Aggravation : In the morning. 

¦re Stool : Drawing pains in abdomen : Boris r lUS. 

¦ampaniments : Constriction in the chest. Palnof the heart. Constriction of the heart as iron hand. 

Profuse hemorrhages from all the mucous membranes. 

Clinical experience with cactus is wholly wanting in these affections. It may prove useful in diarrhoea accompanying heart affections, with the characteristic heart symptoms. 

21. CALCAREA CARB. 

Ks : Yellowish fecal ; Gray, clay-like fecal ; ry ; Frothy ; Whitish ; 

Fetid ; Sour ; Involuntary ; 

¦avations: In fat children: In infants with ontanelles : In scrofulous persons : In chil- During dentition : After milk : After smoked 

Before Stool : Great irritability : Nausea. 

During Stool : Paleness : Tearing pain in rectum. After Stool : Faintishness : Lassitude. 

tor cold drinks, more at ni°"ht Desire for winp* 

31 





salt or sweet things. Canine hunger in the morning Sour taste in the mouth, or of bread. Sour vomiting or regurgitation, particularly of soured food, milk, &c. Swollen, distended abdomen, with emaciation and good appetite. 

Kful and difficult urination, the urine being md having a peculiar strong, pungent, fetid 

¦ility. Profuse sweat on the head when 9- 

In selecting calcarea c, the stool is of less importance than the person, and the concomitant symptoms. These often render it the indispensable remedy in psoric individuals. The smell of the urine- cannot be described, but once smelled it is never forgotten. The color will distinguish it from that of benz. AC. 

22. CAMPHOR. 

Stools : Blackish ; — (Watery ?) Involuntary ; 

Attack very sudden 

Aggravation : During epidemic cholera : Prom hot 



Bmpaniments : Great anguish and discourage- Icy coldness of the whole body, with cbillid shaking, or cold, clammy, debilitating peril. Face pale, livid, purple, icy cold, disupv-ir lit) drawn up exposinn the teeth ! 

32 





foam at the mouth; eyes sunken and fixed. Aversion to light. No thirst ; or violent thirst. 

¦en and great sinking of strength. generally painless. 

Gold sweat on the face. 

Kolera. : Great sinking and collapse, sometimes stool. 

23. CANTHARIS. 

Stools : Yellow, brown, watery ; White or palereddish mucous stools, like scrapings of the intestines. Bloody ; 

Bloody mucous ; Green mucous ; 

Frequent ; Small ; Corrosive ; 

Aggravation: At night: In the evening: During the day : After coffee, (pains and loathing). 

¦re Stool : Violent colic : Urging : Pinching (gastrium. 

¦ng Stool : Colic and pinching continue : Pain anus : Pressing and urging, extorting cries : \g at the anus : Prolapse of rectum : 

IP Stool : Colic relieved, or continues with less ;e : Tenesmus : Burning, biting, and slinganus : Shuddering: Violent chilliness as l water were poured over one, with internal h. 

Accompaniments : Anxious restlessness. Irritability. Pale, wretched appearance. Deathlike appearance during the pains. Thirstlessness, or violent burning thirst: or aversion to drinks to food 

c 

33 





and to toba jco. Violent pains in abdomen and intestines. Burning in abdomen. Abdomen very sensitive to touch 

Buent ineffectual desire to urinate, painful, g after urination. 

¦appearance like scrapings of the intestines is st characteristic symptom of canthaeis, and quently call for it when the more painful and symptoms are not present. 

24. CAPSICUM. 

¦Is : Mucous ; Bloody mucous ; Tenacious ' ; streaked with, black blood. Thin, adhesive, mixed with black blood. 

Frequent; Small; 

Aggravations : At night : After drinking : By currents of air, even warm air (pains.) 

Before Stool : Cutting colic : Flatulent colic : Writhing pains about the umbilicus. 

¦ng Stool : Cutting and writhing continue : ms. 

After Stool : Tenesmvs : Burning at anus : Thirst, drinking causing shuddering: Drawing pains in the back. 

Enpaniments: Homesickness, with redness hecks and sleeplessness. Swollen, cracked I at, watery taste. Putrid taste as of putrid Food tastes sour. Sour taste in the mouth. 

34 





unsuccessful desire to urinate. 

Yawning. Sleeplessness. 

Capsicum is one of the royal remedies for dysentery; resembling cantii. much in its symptoms, but differing equally as much, as a comparison will show. When the choice becomes difficult, the drinking after stool "causing shuddering, and the drawing pains in the back after stool, will fix the decision on caps., and distinguish it also from mere. corr. and nux VOM. 

25. CARBO VEG. 

¦Is : Thin pale mucous ; Bloody mucous ; thin fecal ;) 

¦ vent; Involuntary; Putrid; Cadaverous g; 

¦avation : After long-continued or severe acute : After loss of fluids : After cold drinks : it food. 

Before Stool : Slight cutting. 

During Stool: Burning and cutting in anus: Tenesmus. 

After Stool : Burning in anus : Trembling weak- 

Impaniments : Bestless7iess and anxiety, worse to 6P. M. Greenish color, or great paleness face. The gums recede from the teeth and asily. Desire for coffee. Flatulent distenthe abdomen particularly after eatiiiff as 

35 





tations. Profuse and constant salivation of stringy saliva. Emission of large quantities of flatus, inodorous, or putrid. Skin pale, or blue and cold. 

¦holera : Collapse without stool : Cold breath igue. Voice lost. 

Except in cholera, carbo veg. is rarely indicated in the beginning of any acute disease of the bowels ; but in the later stages it may become the only remedy capable of producing a favorable change. It will not often be required in cases that have had good homoeopathic ti'eatment, but much more frequently in those coming from allopathic hands. After it are frequently suitable ars., china., mere. sol., or psor. 

26. CASTOREUM. 

Stools : Bloody mucous ; Greenish mucous ; Whitish watery ; 

Frequent ; 

Amelioration : By pressure, warmth, and bending double (pains). 

¦ire Stool: Cutting colic: Pinching colic: 1 rumbling : Pressing in the groins. 

Ping Stool: Emission of fetid flatulence: Burnthe anus. 

After Stool : Burning at the anus. 

Accompaniments: Yawning. Chilliness. Bad smell from the mouth. Violent thirst. 

36 







Stools : Liquid fecal ; White mucous ; 

¦ravations :In the evening : At night : From r striking the abdomen : After eating fresh 

Before Stool : Twisting abdominal pains. 

After Stool : Nausea : Salt-water brash. 

Accompaniments : Pressure at the pit of the throat, just over the top of the sternum, as of a foreign body, or as of food lodged in oesophagus, causing constant disposition to swallow ; better while eating, worse after. Aversion to sweet things. Fresh meat causes nausea and water brash; smoked meat agrees. Much thirst for cold drinks. Pressure in the stomach. Necessity to loosen the clothing about the hypochondria. 

¦luntary emission of urine, at night ; when g ; when coughing. 

Kticum will be found useful chiefly in a chronic y to diarrhoea, in dyspeptics and consumphich is renewed whenever taking fresh meat. 

28. CHAMOMILLA. 

Pis : Oreen mucous ; Mixed green and white :; Chopped white and yellow mucous : Green ; Bilious; Slimy mucous ; 

Hot; Small; Frequent; Smelling like bad eggs, Corrosive ; Painless (green watery) ; 



37 







Before Stool : Anxiety : Colic. 

During Stool : Colic : Eructations : Nausea : Retching : Thirst : Vertigo : Perspiration, with anxiety. 

After Stool : Relief: Stitches in rectum. 

Impaniments : Desire for many things which cted when offered. Peevishness. 11l humor, m cry much, and are only stilled by being about. Redness of the cheeks, or of one nly. Red rash on the cheeks. Tongue and iry. Tongue coated thick yellow, or white, sour, or slimy taste. Sour vomiting of food 7 mucus. Cutting or tearing colic. 

¦ning in the sleep, with hot, sticky sweat on ahead. 

Envulsions : Both legs moved up and down altely : Grasping with the hands : Mouth drawn d fro: Eyes staring: Eyes and face distorted : >r : Cough with rattling in the chest : Yawning tretching. 

Novices often fail with ciiamomilla. It is not adapted to every case of diarrhoea during dentition. The mental symptoms are of chief importance, but the desire to be carried about is not alone decisive. If, however, the other symptoms correspond, particularly of the stool, this symptom will make the choice more certain. Cham, is not often indicated in cases 

38 





the cure alone, requiring to be followed by mere. sol., or sulph. 

29. CHELIDONIUM MAX 

Stools : Thin, bright yellow fecal ; Brown watery; White watery; Mucous; 

Aggravations : At night, (white watery). 

Amelioration : From wine, (colic). 

Before Stool : Rumbling in the abdomen : Nausea. 

During Stool: Rumbling in abdomen: Nausea. 

After Stool: Rumbling in abdomen. 

Eimpaniments : Depression of spirits. Sad- Slimy, white-coated tongue. Disgusting or taste, food tasting natural. Metallic acid Diminished appetite. Desire for wine : for vhich agrees ; for hot drinks, which agree, vi to cheese and boiled meat. Jaundice. 

Eie chelidonium combination of symptoms is very common. Clinical experience with it is ;fore meagre. The desire for hot drinks is very liar, and may prove characteristic. 

30. CHINA. 

¦s : Yellow watery ; Undigested ; Blackish ; I Whitish ; Greenish ; Bloody ; Yellow mv- 

Frequent ; Involuntary ; Putrid ; Corrosive ; Painless, (undigested and watery stools). 

39 





¦ After measles: During small-pox: After acute disease : After loss of fluids : On aldays: Afternoon (colic). 

Amelioration : By bending double (colic). 

Before Stool : Colic. 

During Stool: Stitches and acrid feeling in anus: 

After Stool: Tingling in the rectum, as from 

Accompaniments : Ptyalism. Tongue coated white or yellow. Diminished appetite. Bitter or sour taste. Bitter taste of all kinds of nourishment. Desire for sour things ; wine ; fruit ; cherries. Desire to drink frequently, but little at a time. Enlargement of the liver and spleen. Colic, often violent, of pinching character, with nausea, with thirst, relieved by bending double, returning every afternoon. Cutting about the umbilicus, with cold sweat on the forehead. Distention of the abdomen. Tympanitis. Emission of large quantities of flatulence, sometimes very 

Dark urine. 

Great weakness, particularly with the painless stools. Inclination to sweat. Profuse night sweats. 

China has a very strong resemblance to carbo veg. The character of the stool will usually serve to distinguish them, together with the fact, that with the former the stools are often entirely in the night, being absent during the day, even in severe cases, 11 nlpsisn lpsis fri f* v nppni* n ti f^i* tyi f^fi 1 q w hif*h I^l fll cto s\ n fl f\ f\ 1 

40 





tional distinction. When well selected, chin, usually completes the cure. 

31. CINA. 

¦ils : Greenish, slimy; Bilious ; White, mucous ; ntary ; Frequent ; 

¦'avations : During Dentition : In the daytime : drinking?) In children. 

Before Stool : Pinching colic. 

gmpanlments : Disposed to cry much. Rejects ing that is offered. Paleness of the face, larly around the nose and mouth, and sickly ,nee around the eyes. Disposition to pick or the nose. Cutting and pinching in abdomen. 

¦?, turbid urine. White, jelly-like urine, sleep; waking frequently, or frequently g position, waking with cries. Will not sleep rocking. Grinding of the teeth during sleep. 

P accompanying symptoms, particularly those d, will more frequently indicate cina than the 3r of the stools, and will render the choice The characteristic urine is the surest indica- 

32. CISTUS CAN. 

¦S : Thin, grayish yellow, fecal ; Squirting out ; 

¦vations : After-part of the night till noon: uit : After coffee. 



41 





42 

THE REMEDIES AND 

Before Stool : Irresistible urging. 

¦ompaniments : Desire for acid food. Nausea n the stomach after eating. 

¦ irresistible urging to stool early in the mornlike sulph., but the color and consistence of ol are different. 

33. COCCULTJS. 

Stools: Yellow, soft, fecal; Slimy; 

Fetid ; Frequent ; 

Aggravations: (After drinking cold water?) 

Before Stool : Emission of hot flatulence. 

Accompaniments : Metallic, coppery taste in the mouth. Sourish taste after a meal. Intense thirst while eating. Aversion to food ; tobacco ; drinks ; acids. Food tastes as though salted too little. Nausea, with tendency to faint. Excessive nausea and vomiting when riding in a carriage, or when becoming cold. Violent spasm of the stomach, with griping, tearing pains. 

Fetid, or hot flatus. Watery urine. 

34. COFFEA. 

Bis : Liquid, fecal ; sive ; 

E aggravation : During dentition: In infants: From den joy : From taking cold: In open air. 

Accompaniments : Over-sensitiveness. Excitement. Wakefulness. Colic, as if the stomach had been 



gravates the symptoms. 

35. COLCHICUM. 

¦Is: Watery; Jelly-like mucous; Bloody; d with a skinny substance. White mucous ; 

¦use ; frequent (watery) ; Small ; frequent r and mucous) ; Painless (watery) ; 

Bavations : In the autumn : In hot, damp r : In the evening and night. 

From motion (vomiting). 

Before Stool : Colic. 

During Stool : Tenesmus. 

After Stool : Tenesmus : Relief of colic. 

Accompaniments : Peevish ; external impressions, light, noise, strong smells, contact, etc., disturb the temper. Paleness. Heat in the mouth, with thirst. Great thirst, even burning, unquenchable. Increased secretion of saliva, often very profuse. The saliva causes nausea and inclination to vomit when swallowing it. Aversion to food on looking at it, and particularly when smelling of it. The smell ofjish, eggs, fat meats, or broth causes nausea even to faintness. Violent vomiting occurring with great ease, (with the watery stools). Vomiting of yellowish mucus, very bitter, preceded by long and violent gagging. Every motion excites or renews the vom- 

Bing in the stomach or icy coldness, also in omen. Colic. Distention of the abdomen. 

> 



43 







Bn. stands next to podoph. in painless cholera . It differs chiefly in the stools being smaller s gushing ; in the time of aggravation, and senee of the nausea and vomiting. 

Kysentery the jelly-like and skinny stools are haracteristic, particularly the latter. Other ms distinguish it from aloe., canth., and [CH. 

36. COLOCYNTHIS. 

I tools : Brownish-yellow fecal ; Saffron yellow, thy, liquid; First watery and mucous, then bil, and lastly bloody; Bloody; Bilious; Thin, \nigh, slimy, and watery; Thin mucous (pain); Undigested ; 

Excoriating ; Frequent ; Not profuse ; 

Sour putrid ; Musty, like brown paper burning ; 

Eations : From cold diet : From sour things : ting: After a meal: From fruit : From After vexation, indignation, or grief from ent : During dentition. 

Ameliorations : From coffee ; smoking ; pressure ; lying on the abdomen; bending double ; by violent exercise, (pains). 

Before Stool : Difficulty of retaining the stool : ting colic: Great urging. 

During Stool : Tensive pain in the forehead : Cutting colic: Tenesmus: Nausea. 

Aff-pp Cfrvf I • Ctiacatinn nf pnlip for mnro rnrplv 

44 





THEIR INDICATIONS. 

45 

the colic occurs chiefly, and is very severe after 

Burning and darting pains in the anus. 

Bmpaniments : Tongue coated white or yel?ongue feels scalded. Burning at the tip of 2;ue. Bitter taste in the mouth. Much thirst, lasting until falling asleep, and returning on £. Vomiting of food without nausea. Bilious g> 

Intense griping, cutting, or squeezing in the intestines, coming up into the stomach and causing nausea. Squeezing as though between stones. Abdomen feels empty and sore. Rumbling in abdomen. Urine fetid, viscid, jelly-like. Frequent urging to urinate, with small discharge. Cramps in the legs 

Sleeplessness. 

E characteristic pains of coloc. remain always minent indication. Whether they occur before jr stool, or during the interval, it will remove and with them, usually, the whole train of oms. Sometimes in dysentery, with much ms, mere. is needed afterward. 

37. CONIUM. 

El tools : Liquid fecal ; mingled with hard lumps. tery ; Undigested ; 

Involuntary (during sleep without waking) ; Before Stool : Cutting pains. 

During Stool : Chilliness : Tenesmus : Burning 



¦r Stool : Palpitation of the heart, sometimes ittent: Tremulous weakness, passing off in the ir, or when lying. 

Bmpaniments : Desire for acids ; salt food ; Nausea after eating. Much inflation of the n after meals, particularly after milk. Emisfetid or cold flatulence. 

¦ings and gripings in the abdomen. Frequent lon. Intermittent stream of urine ; the flow md starts repeatedly. Yellow color of the Jaundice. 

Much weakness and lassitude, with desire to sit 

E chronic diarrhoea of old men con. is sometimes emedy, as indicated by the stool and the urisymptoms, with the tremulous weakness. It may become indicated by the same symptoms in jer persons, and then, usually, women. 

38. COPAIViE. 

Stools : White fecal ; Bloody ; Watery ; Copious ; Involuntary ; 

Aggravation : In the morning. 

Amelioration : By bending double (colic). 

¦ng Stool : Drawing, tearing colic: Chilliness: ms. 

Accompaniments: Loss of appetite. Nausea. Yom- 

If we had had any clinical experience with copaiot 

46 





the above symptoms, lhey seem sufficiently distinct and peculiar, but are too few to render a selec- 

39. CORNUS CIRCINATA. 

Bis : Dark, bilious, greenish, slimy : 1 offensive ; Frequent and scanty ; 

Aggravations: After eating: In the morning. Amelioration : By passage of offensive flatus. 

Before Stool : Urging. 

During Stool : Griping pains about the umbilicus: Rumbling, and passage of much very offensive flatus : Burning in rectum and anus : Tenesmus. 

After Stool : Burning in rectum and anus : Relief of dulness in the head, and distention of stomach. 

Accompaniments: Entirely indisposed to mental or physical exertion. Cannot think or read. Great relaxation of mind and body. 

Dulness and weight in the head, particularly the temples, relieved by coffee. Dark rings around the eyes. Conjunctiva yellow. Yellow color of the face. Face hollow, with an expression of weakness and dulness. Heat in the face without redness. Tongue coated white or yellow. Aphthae. Bitter taste. Thirst for cold drinks. Nausea, with general sticky sweat and feeling of exhaustion. Pain in the stomach after eating, with distention of the stomach and abdomen, better after passage of flatus and stool. 

Rattling and rumbling in abdomen. Griping pains 

WootnPßa nf tVio vt ¦ '+ ' 

47 





Cornus c. deserves more attention, and will be found frequently useful, by those who make the most of every well-proved remedy. 

40. CROTON TIGLIUM. 

¦Is: Yellow watery ; Dark green, or greenishliquid ; Tenacious mucous ; 

Coming out like a shot. 

¦¦avations: After drinking : While nursing: eating. 

Amelioration : From hotmilk(colic): After sleeping. 

Before Stool : Heat : Anxiety. 

Kng Stool : Sweat: Nausea: Colic: Scraping erior wall of rectum. 

Er Stool : Sweat on the forehead. Pressing in trium and umbilicus, with protrusion of recnd constant urging to stool: Nausea, with 

Accompaniments : Dry, parched lips. Excessive nausea, with vanishing of sight. Gagging, with vertigo, worse after drinking. Colic and writhing around the umbilicus. On pressing on the umbilicus with the hand, a painful sensation is felt all along the intestinal canal to the termination of the rectum, causing the latter to protrude somewhat. 

The three highly characteristic symptoms of crot. tig., the yellow watery stool, sudden expulsion, and aggravation from drink and food, form a trio whose presence will render success certain and brilliant. This stool is not always painful. The other stools 

48 





by this remedy. 

41. CUBEBiE. 

¦ils: Blackish, yellowish, fecal; Bilious; Yelansparent, mucous ; mingled with whitish par- Bloody mucous ; 

¦vent, (dysenteric stool). Copious, (bilious and Involuntary; 

Aggravations : At night, in bed, (colic). 

¦lioration : Prom rising from the bed and mov>ut, (colic). 

Before Stool : Cutting pains in hypogastriuin. 

During Stool : Tenesnms: Cutting pains: Loud discharge of flatus. 

Eccompaniments : Desire for delicacies; oranges: fruits; spirits; brandy; fresh bread; onions; onds ; nuts. Unquenchable thirst, with feeling Iryness of the mouth, though moistened with an saliva. Nausea. Abdomen distended and very iitive. 

42. CUPRUM MET. 

¦Is : Watery ; with flakes. Bloody ; vent ; Not very copious ; 

Amelioration : From drinking cold water, (vom- 

Bccompaniments : Restlessness, tossing about and ¦tant uneasiness. Changed features, full of anh. Spasmodic distortion of the face. Face and 

l> 

X 

5 

49 





¦a. and cold. Bmkm, Jeep W«M U*. wound them. Excessive thirst. Sweet taste mouth. Tip of the tongue cold. Drink dethe cesophagus with a gurgling sound. 

Violent vomiting ; of bile ; of water containing flakes, with violent colic and cramps. Violent pains in the stomach. Spasm of the stomach. Violent spasms in the abdomen and upper and lower limbs, with piercing screams. 

Urine scanty and seldom, or suppressed. 

Cramps in the legs and feet. 

Soft, slow pulse, weak and small. 

Long-continued, general cold sweat. 

General convulsions, with continued vomiting and violent colic. 

43. DIGITALIS. 

¦Is : "Watery fecal and mucous ; Yellowishjcal; Whitish or ash-gray fecal; Involuntary ; 

¦avations : During jaundice : Afternoon, five 'clock, (vomiting). 

¦re Stool: Cutting or tearing colic: Chillifainting. 

After Stool : Urging in the rectum. 

Accompaniments : Pale face, with bluish hue under the pale skin. 

Kr color of face and conjunctiva. Tongue hite. Mouth, tongue, and gums sore. Feleetish ptyalism. Loss of appetite, with lorn 1 Thirst with desirp for sour drinks 

50 





Desire for bitter food. Violent nausea, with anguish and great despondency. Violent vomiting of food ; of green bile ; mucus. Vomiting is sometimes accompanied by external heat, mingled with chills, and followed by perspiration with chilliness. The nausea is not relieved by vomiting. 

Tenderness of the liver. 

¦tant desire to urinate, only a small quantity assed each time. Great weakness. Feeling ing at the stomach, as though one would die. 

¦talis is chiefly indicated by white stool, with ms of jaundice, and the sinking at the stomach. 

44. DIOSCOEEA V. 

Bs : Deep yellow, thin, fecal ; Bilious ; 

Profuse ; 

Aggravations : By sitting, or lying, or bending double (colic). 

¦liorations : By eating: In open air : (nausea leral symptoms) : By currant-wine, pressure, Iking, (colic). 

Before Stool : Colic : Urging. 

After Stool: Haemorrhoids: Weak, faint feeling in abdomen : The colic continues. 

¦mpaniments : Nausea. Vomiting. Eructa- Violent twisting colic, occurring in regular sms, with, remissions. 

Pains in the legs and knees, relieved by motion, , , ... 

51 





Disposition to paronychia. 

Diosc. has a much narrower range than coloc, but, as in the latter, the colic is the principal indica* tion. It is easily distinguished from the colic of any other remedy by the above symptoms. The disposition to felons may be found with the tendency to colic. Whether met with thus or singly, diosc. will usually cure whitlow if taken as soon as the pricking in the finger is felt, and greatly relieve, and hasten the termination, if taken later. 

45. DULCAMARA. 

Bis : Yellowish, greenish, watery ; Whitish ; with flocculi. White mucous ; Green mv- Slimy mucous ; Bloody ; 

Sour smelling; 

Frequent ; Scanty ; 

Kwations : After taking cold : When the weaomes colder : During wet and cold weather : it : During dentition : After cold drinks : In moon. 

Before Stool: Perspiration: Nausea: Colic. 

¦ng Stool: Colic: Perspiration: Heat: Thirst: tions: Vomiting: Prolapse of rectum. 

After Stool : Thirst. 

Accompaniments : Impatience. Aphthae. Dry tongue. Spongy gums, with ptyalism of tenacious, soaplike, saliva. Much thirst for cold drinks. Vomiting of mucus ; of tenacious mucus. Pinching and fMitt.infi" fiolio Dm hpnt nf the sl^in 

52 





P. is seldom required except in cases directly c to taking cold, or to a change in the weam warm to cold ; but then it becomes the inible and all-sufficient remedy, if given at the ig of the attack. Later, it is of less or no 

46. ELATERIUIff. 

¦Is : Frothy, watery ; Dull, olive-green diss, (mucous or fecal ?) Dark green mucous n masses mixed with whitish mucus, streaked ood. 

¦ frequent and copious, {watery) ; Frequent, 

Pravations : After taking cold by standing on ground after exertion. 

Eipaniments : Bitter taste. Nausea. Vomit•pression, stricture, and pain in the epigasith difficult breathing. Violent cutting pains )domen. 

This remedy deserves further proving 

47. FEERUM MET. 

Bs : Watery ; Slimy, mucous ; Undigested; tary ; Painless ; 

¦¦avation : After abuse of Cinchona : After or drinking. 

¦mpaniments : Rush of blood to the head. I face. Pale face, with red spot on each Aversion to acids, ale, eggs, meats, which 



53 





also disagree, particularly meats. Unquenchable thirst or thirstlessness. Vomiting of food soon after eating ; of sour and acrid substances. Feeling of weight in abdominal viscera, as though they would fall down when walking. Abdomen feels sore and bruised to the touch, and when walking. Hard and distended abdomen. Emaciation. Debility. Chlorosis. 

Exhausting sweats. 

Ferrum is sometimes required in cases of chronic diarrhoea, in both adults and children, with the above symptoms. Were it not for its excessive abuse by the allopathists, from whom such cases mostly come, it would be more frequently useful. 

48. FLUORIC ACID. 

Stools : Watery ; Yellowish-brown, fecal ; 

Offensive ; 

¦ avations : In the morning : After coffee : On te days, a later hour each time. 

¦re Stool : Viscid, tasteless saliva in the mouth : g, pinching pain in the stomach and about the Sensation of distention from flatulence. 

During Stool : Protrusion of haemorrhoids : Prolapsus ani : Pain about the navel. 

Accompaniments : Viscid saliva in the mouth at night on waking. Diminished appetite. Desire for highly-seasoned and piquant things. Aversion to coffee. 

The aggravation from coffee, classing fluor. ac. with three other remedies (rive it its chief interests 

54 





of the mouth and appetite, and the absence of head- 

49. GELSEMINUM. 

Stools : Yellow fecal ; Cream-colored fecal ; Bil- 

¦a vations : From sudden depressing emotions, grief, bad news. 

Before Stool : Colic : Passage of flatus. 

¦ng Stool : Difficult passage of stool, as though lincter ani were spasmodically closed. 

Accompaniments : Desire to be quiet, to be let alone. Feeling of intoxication. Tongue coated yellowish-white, with fetid breath. Little or no thirst. 

Drowsiness. 

Many persons are seized with diarrhoea whenever subjected to sudden depressing emotions, particularly fear and anxiety. The anticipation of any unusual ordeal —as appearing in public, undergoing an examination, submitting to a surgical operation —is sufficient to excite it. Gels, removes it, together with the trepidation which caused it. 

50. GRAPHITES. 

E tools : Brown fluid; mixed with undigested sub' ces, and of an intolerable fetor. 

Reddish or white mucous ; 

55 





Aggravations : At night : After taking told : After the menses. 

Before Stool : Colic. 

During Stool : Burning in the rectum. 

¦r Stool : Smarting soreness in the anus : Tenmorrhoids. 

Itmpaniments: Bitter taste in the mouth. Taste otten eggs in the morning. Sour taste after a Tongue coated. Aversion to salt things, meat, i. Desire for drink to cool one's self internally, t thirst. Fulness and hardness of the abdo- Distended abdomen. 

Lassitude of the whole body. Inclination to stretch, without being able to satisfy it sufficiently. 

I Graph, occupies a subordinate position in the latment of diarrhoea, but the emphasized sympns describe a condition sometimes met with, and en chronic, where it proves curative. 

51. GRATIOLA OFF. 

I Stools: Watery; Yellow, green, frothy, watery ; own fetid mucous ; 

Frequent; Gushing out with force ; 

¦avations : In the open air : After drinking ly of water not very cold. 

¦iorations : After eating, and by eructations, )• 

Before Stool : Nausea : Rumbling in the abdo- 

56 





ing, disappearing- when sitting : Coldness : Shudder- 

Kompaniments : Accumulation of clear water mouth, causing frequent spitting. Appetite thing but bread. Aversion to smoking. Violirst. Nausea, and inclination to vomit. Vomf bitter water or a yellowish substance. Cold of the stomach, as if full of water. 

Cold feeling in the abdomen. 

Ire is reason to believe that gratiola will prove ilarly serviceable in cases of cholera morbus ig from drinking excessive quantities of water crate coolness ; the quantity, and not the coldeing the cause. 

52. GUMM. GUTT 

Stools : Thin yellow fecal ; Watery ; Yellowish or greenish watery ; mixed with mucus. Dark yellowish-brown, watery ; Bloody mucous or slimy ; Dark green mucous ; 

¦isive ; {dark green mucous stool.) Corrosive ; vent ; Quite copious ; 

¦ing out all at once, with a single, somewhat led effort. 

Aggravation : Forenoon, or during the day. 

E melioration : From pressing the abdomen, (cutpains). 

Before Stool : Sudden urging, with hot pinching 

57 





lJ li Ji 1 1 Cl OIUUI '¦ tJvf \Jft(J LV / 'Jfjffffj i/itlvotfiy Lifts k>L'./'Jv li\j pass quickly : Much flatus : Burning and heat in the anus : Tenesmus : Prolapsus ani. 

¦p Stool : Feeling of great relief in the abdos though an irritating substance were removed the intestines: Burning .in the anus: Anus id excoriated. 

Impaniments : Despondency. Sadness. Volupching of the canthi and eyelids. Diminished i. There seems to be a good appetite, but a od satisfies it. 

Bithae ; deep ulcers in the mouth, inner side of >s and cheeks. Nausea and vomiting, after drink or food, (with the watery, and somethe mucous stools). 

Rumbling in the abdomen. Gurgling, as of a fluid running from a bottle. 

Urine smells like onions, scenting the room. 

Much lassitude and debility 

Gumm. gutt. is one of the most important remedies in the treatment of diarrhoea, both acute and chronic, and has also a place in the therapeutics of infantile diarrhoea, and of dysentery. It closely resembles aloes. It may be distinguished, however, by the absence of haemorrhoids, by the rapid expulsion of stool, and by the immediate accompanying symptoms of the stool as italicized above. When well selected, gamboge usually gives a prompt and permanent cure, without subsequent aid from other remedies. 

58 





53. HELLEBORUS NIGER. 

¦Is : White , jelly-like, mucous ; Pure, tenacious^ iucous ; Watery; 

Frequent ; 

Bavations : In children : During dentition . acute hydrocephalus. 

Bre Stool : Nausea : Colic. ng Stool: Urging: Tenesmus. 

After Stool : Burning, smarting, at the anus. 

Bmpaniments : Taciturnity. Pale, oedematous nice of the face. Ptyalism, with soreness of ners of the mouth. Aphthae in the mouth, ig of green or blackish substances. 

Hell. n. brings help sometimes, when without it help would be hard to find, or be sought in vain. The stool is chiefly characteristic, and is such as sometimes occurs in protracted and dangerous cases of infantile diarrhoea. 

54. HEPAR STJLPH. 

¦Is: Light yellow fecal ; thin or papescent ; Unit Whitish, sour smelling ; Bloody mucous ; 

Painless ; 

¦avations : During the day : After eating : rinking cold water : After abuse of mercury lona. 

¦lioration : After eating, (symptoms of the h.) 

Accompaniments : Depressed or irritable mood. Disinclination for mental or bodily exertion. Sour 

59 





ish. metallic taste. Bitter taste. Generally good appetite. Desire for acids ; wine ; tea. Much thirst. Hot, sour regurgitation of food. Sour vomiting. Vomiting of green, acrid water. Frequent momentary attacks of nausea. Morning nausea and vomiting. Pressure and pain in the stomach, relieved by eating ; by eructation ; by passing flatus. Empty sinking feeling at the stomach. Strong and comfortable feeling after a meal. Frequent desire to loosen the clothing about the stomach, particularly a few hours after a meal. Acrid feeling in the stomach during digestion. 

Hepar sul. occupies a leading position in the therapeutics of chronic diarrhoea. The cases calling for it are among the most common. They come often from allopathic treatment, having abuse of mercury or cinchona, and often suppression of scabies in their history. So many of the characteristic symptoms are referred to the stomach, that the cases might be classed under dyspepsia. It most resembles lycop. Ke time of aggravation is the most constant disction. 

55. HIPPOMANE MANCINELLA 

Stools: Dark or black fecal; afterward watery; Fetid; 

Aggravations : At night : At midnight : In the morning : After drinking water, (colic). 

Before Stool : Sudden urging : Colic. 

I During Stool: Colic: Much discharge of flatus: irning in the stomach and anus : Tenesmus. 

60 







Accompaniments : Violent headache. Dryness of the mouth. Burning in the mouth, not relieved by cold water. Mouth and tongue studded with small vesicles, preventing the taking of solid nourishment. Bleeding of the mouth. Tongue coated white, with small red spots not coated. Bloody taste. Bitter taste, worse after sleeping. Increased saliva, fetid, yellowish, burning. Thirst for water. Aversion to wine, spirits, meat, and bread. Violent vomiting, of ingesta ; bitter; watery; green; of a bitter watery substance, on which float pieces like white, hardened fat. 

Tympanitis. Drowsiness. 

Eough published nearly fifteen years ago, this ly remains a stranger to most of us. The toms are not at all equivocal, and it may well iced among our reserve forces. 

56. HYDROPHOBIN. 

Stools : Bloody mucous ; Bloody ; 

¦¦avations : On seeing water, or hearing it run: ng Stool : Tenesmus. 

After Stool : Tenesmus. 

Impaniments: 111 humor. Irritability. Inclito be rude and abusive, to bite and strike. >n to drinking water, but can take small quanchocolate. Large quantities of tough saliva louth, with constant spitting. 

II IDKUrII, cIU.Uo till 1 11 11 i t -n I 1 11 Li, cLHU V\ UII~CJIIIII 111*. U 

61 





with the other symptoms, makes it applicable in dysentery. Those who have scruples about using a remedy of this character, are at liberty to cure cases having this distinctive condition, with some other remedy, if they can. 

57. HYOSCIAMUS. 

Stools : Yellow watery ; Watery ; Mucous ; 

Frequent ; Involuntary ; in bed without consciousness of it. Painless ; Nearly odorless ; 

Aggravations: During typhoid fever : During ly- 

Accompaniments: Delirium. Things seem 100 large. Frequent looking at the hands, because they seem too large. Unconsciousness, with no wants except thirst. Fear of being poisoned or sold. When spoken to, replies properly, but delirium and unconsciousness immediately return. Desire to uncover, or undress, and remain naked. 

¦n, parched, dry tongue. Much thirst. Hie¦ 

Involuntary urination. 

Sleeplessness from nervous irritation. 

¦ultus tendinum. Picking at the bed-clothes. sions. Spasms. 

¦symptoms of the stools of hyos. are suffiunlike those of any other remedy, to make ice easy, but the accompanying symptoms certain. 

62 





58. IPECACUANHA. 

Stools : Green mucous ; as green as grass. White mucous; Bloody; Bloody mucous ; Fermented; 

Putrid ; Frequent ; 

Aggravations: At night: During dentition: In children : After a cold : From motion, (colic). 

Amelioration : From rest, (colic). 

Before Stool : Colic : Nausea : Vomiting. 

During Stool: Colic: Nausea: Vomiting : Coldness : Paleness. 

After Stool : Lassitude. 

K)mpaniments : Irritability. Impatience. Pale with blue margins about the eyes. Increased an of saliva. No thirst. Desire for dainties eet things. Nausea, proceeding from the stomith empty eructations and a flow of saliva. 

Vomiting : of ingesta ; of yellow mucus ; of bile ; of large lumps of fetid mucus; of green, jelly-like mucus ; of grass-green mucus ; of large quantities of mucus. Excessive indescribable sick feeling in the region of the stomach. Flatulent colic. Griping, pinching about the umbilicus, as though the intestines were grasped with hands. Skin cool. Suffocative catarrh of the chest. Spasms. Sleep with eyes half open. 

The continuous nausea is the most constant distinctive symptom of ipec. The addition of the characteristic vomiting, and the violent colic is more rare, 

63 





Ply is seldom suited to cases of lohg continuand is often unable to complete the cure alone. 

59. IRIS VERSICOLOR. 

Stools: Watery; Watery; mixed with mucus. 

Bloody, mucous ; Thin, yellow, fecal ; 

Greenish ; Undigested ; 

Frequent ; Profuse ; Corrosive ; 

Aggravations: At night: After supper. Amelioration : By bending double, (colic) 

Before Stool : Rumbling in the abdomen : Cutting iv the lower part of the abdomen. 

¦ng Stool: Cutting: Tenesmus: Burning at ,8. 

¦r Stool : Pricking as of points in the anus : ig of the anus, as though on fire : Prolapse rectum. 

|)mpaniments: Flat taste. Bitter or putrid Increase of saliva, which is ropy. Loss of c. Empty eructations. Nausea. Vomiting, liming in the mouth, fauces, and oesophagus. t vomiting, of ingesta; of bile ; of an extremely uid. Much exhaustion and debility. 

Eie characteristic symptoms of iris v. are not ig those of most frequent occurrence, but when with, are not difficult to recognize. It will be I applicable mostly to cholera niorbus, occurring s hottest of the season. 

64 





60. JATROPHA CURCAS. 

Stools : Watery ; 

Profuse ; Gushing out like a torrent. 

Accompaniments : Pale face, blue margins about the eyes. Dryness and burning of the mouth, tongue, and throat, or increase of thin saliva. Violent, unquenchable thirst. Eructations. Vomiting of large masses of dark green bile and mucus, of large quantities of watery albuminous substances. Burning in the stomach. Spasmodically contracting pains in the stomach. Abdomen svyollen, and tender to the touch. Rumbling and noise as of a bottle of water being emptied in the abdomen, not ceasing after stool. Cramps in the legs and feet. Coldness of the body. General, cold, clammy, perspiration. 

Those who have used Jatropha in the treatment of cholera, have confirmed the above symptoms, and they are such as give it a prominent place in the treatment of the first stage of that disease, before the period of collapse. The albuminous vomiting is a very characteristic symptom. This and the other symptoms are also sometimes met with in cholera morbus. 

61. lODINE. 

Stools : Watery, foamy, whitish mucous ; 

¦dy, mucous ; Thick, mucous; Fecal ; Purulent ; s ; Fetid ; 

Aggravations: In the morning : After eating, (abdominal symptoms). 

Amelioration : After eating, (pain in stomach). 

65 





After Stool : Burning at the anus. 

Accompaniments : Restlessness. Inclination to constantly change position, so that one can neither sit nor sleep. Pale, yellowish complexion. Aphthae in the mouth, with ptyalism. Thickly coated, or dry tongue. Putrid smell from the mouth. Much thirst. Eating too often and too much, digestion being rapid, and yet the emaciation goes on. Pains in the stomach, gnawing or corroding, better after eating. Violent and continued vomiting, renewed by eating. Left hypochondrium hard, and painful on pressure, (enlarged spleen). Cutting in the abdomen. Pressing and bearing down toward the pelvis. Sleeplessness. Emaciation. Prostration and debility. 

lodine is suitable only to a chronic diarrhoea of an exhausting character. The restlessness is a constant desire for change of place, without anguish and tossing, as in ars. 

62. KALI BICH 

¦Is: Blackish, watery; Brownish, frothy, wa- Hloody ; Jelly-like ; 

Frequent; Gushing out, (watery stools). 

¦avations : In the morning: Periodically, every In the early part of the summer: After rheu- 

¦re Stool : Urgent pressure to stool : (waking the morning.) 

During Stool: Painful urging: Tenesmus. Gnaw- 

66 







Accompaniments: 111 humor. Sadness. Pale yellowish complexion. Dryness of the mouth and lips, relieved only a short time by taking- cold water. Increase of saliva, which is frothy, viscid, and tastes bitter or salt. Tongue coated thick, brown, like thick, yellow felt at the root, papillae elevated. Tongue dry, red, smooth, and cracked. Much thirst. Desire for ale or acid drinks. Nausea, with feeling of heat in the whole body and dizziness. Vomiting of sour, undigested food ; of bitter bile ; of mucus; of pinkish, glairy fluid ; of blood ; accompanied by cold perspiration on the hands. Tympanitis. 

Much debility and desire to lie down. 

Kali bich. proves of great service in a variety of cases, but chiefly in dysentery, with the characteristic tongue and gelatinous stools. Sometimes, however, with those stools the tongue has nothing peculiar. The morning aggravation will then decide the choice. After canth. has removed stools like scrapings, jelly-like stools will sometimes appear. Kali bich. will then complete the cure. 

63. KALI CARB. 

Stools : Light gray, fecal ; Yellowish or brownish, 

Profuse ; Involuntary, (when passing flatus) ; 

Aggravations : At night : In the evening : Day and 

67 





Before Stool : Sudden and violent urging : Colic Pinching deep in the abdomen : Rumbling. 

During Stool : Colic : Smarting at the anus : 

After Stool : Burning at the anus : Pinching pains. 

I Accompaniments: Irritable. Easily startled. Aver« m to noise. Face yellow, bloated. Swelling over the upper eyelid in the morning, like a little bag. litter taste. Desire for acids or sugar. Aversion to c bread or brown bread. Sour eructations Sour miiting. Much flatulence. Drowsiness in the dayne and early in the evening. Much weariness. Delity, and desire to lie down. 

I Kali c. is only useful in chronic cases, with the culiar cachexia revealed by the puffiness under the ebrow. 

64. KALI NITR. 

Stools : Watery ; Thin, fecal ; Bloody ; 

I Aggravations : In the morning: During the day: Her eating veal. 

¦Amelioration: By emission of flatus, (colic and ging). 

Before Stool : Violent colic : Urging. 

¦During Stool : Cutting colic in whole intestinal lal : Tenesmus. 

After Stool : Cutting colic : Tenesmus : Burning and stinging in the anus. 

Accompaniments: Headache. Fetid odor from the mouth. Tongue coated white. Little appetite, with much thirst. Violent colic, more in the right side of 

68 





THEIR INDICATIONS. 

69 



Ie persons always have diarrhoea after eating The curability of such cases with kali nitr. somewhat more confirmation, but no other r has had this symptom so well confirmed as 

65. LACHESIS. 

Stools : Watery ; Light yellow, fecal ; 

Very offensive ; Undigested ; 

Alternating with constipation ; 

¦¦avations : After eating : In the spring : In weather : In the evening or night : After After fruit : During typhoid fever. 

Amelioration : By bending forward, (colic) 

Before Stool: Humbling. 

During Stool: Burning at the anus. 

After Stool : Burning at the anus : Tenesmus. 

Bmpaniments : Loquacity. Anterior half of ue red, smooth, and shining. 

Rtting out the tongue, it catches on the teeth r-lip. Much thirst. Desire for wine ; for Desire to loosen the clothing about the Spasmodic colic, relieved by bending for- Much flatulence. Distention of the abdomen, r. Debility. Exhaustion as from warm wea* 

Lacii. is not often required in the treatment of ciiui l n*jL k u. An cnroQiG c<*bcSj or wncii occun 1 1 1^ m 



the progress of other acute diseases, it may become indicated by the concomitant symptoms. 

66. LAUROCERASUS. 

(Hydrocyanic Acid.) 

Stools : Green, liquid, mucous ; Fecal ; 

Involuntary ; 

Aggravation : In the afternoon. 

Before Stool : Cutting in the abdomen. 

During Stool: Tenesmus. 

After Stool : Burning at the anus. 

Accompaniments : Sunken countenance. Livid, grayish-yellow complexion. Eyes staring, or lightly closed ; pupils dilated, (sometimes contracted) and immovable. White and dry tongue. Violent thirst. Entire loss of appetite. Brink rolls audibly through the (esophagus and intestines. Stitching pain in the liver. Distention of the region of the liver, which is very tender to the touch. 

Suppression or retention of urine. 

Slow, feeble, moaning, or rattling breathing. 

Irregular action of the heart. 

Pulse slow, irregular, or imperceptible 

Skin cold, livid. 

¦holera : Absence of vomiting and stools: As: Coldness of the body: Pulselessness: Faintetanic spasms. 

¦symptoms of lauroc. remind us at once of a vere and fatal form of cholera infantum. The of drink as it rolls down the CBSODhacrus i** 

70 





omen. In these cases, the other symptoms corresponding, this remedy will save many otherwise fatal cases. The same remark applies also to cholera and cholera moi'bus. 

67. LEPTANDBJA. 

¦)ls : Black, fecal, fluid ; Watery ; Watery mv- Watery ; with large quantities of mucus. Pro- Fetid ; 

¦re Stool : Great urging, with inability to ree stool : Severe colic : Loud rumbling. 

After Stool : Sharp, cutting pains, and distress in the umbilical region : Weak feeling in the abdomen and rectum. 

Bicompaniments : Tongue coated yellow along entre. Nausea, with faintness. Vomiting. Severe constant distress between the umbilicus and epigastrium, with sharp, cutting pains. Aching, burning sensation in the region of the liver, aggravated by drinking cold water. 

Much weakness. 

Ically, little is known of lept. ; but the symp-3rived from provings are peculiar and distincough not such as are often met with in prac- The symptom of the region of the liver is n the opposite side, under natr. carb. 

68. LITHIUM CARB. 



71 







Aggravations: After f mil ; After chocolate : At night : In the morning. 

Accompaniments : Appetite quickly satisfied. Gnawing pains in the stomach, relieved by eating. Much stinking flatus. 

Rin the bladder, before and after urination, ig urging to urinate 

69. LYCOPODIUM. 

Ktools:K tools : Thin, brown or pale fecal ; mixed with 1 lumps. Thin, yellow or reddish-yellow, fluid ; 

Fetid ; 

Painless ; 

Bravations : At 4 p. m. and until 8 p. m., (flatupains, and stools) : At IA. M., or soon after ;ht, (stools): During pregnancy: After milk: oysters : (?) After a meal, (stomach and ab) : In the morning, (stools) : After cold food. 

Rneliorations : (Of the stomach symptoms) : By tations : By loosening the clothing about the stom' By rubbing the epigastrium with the hand : By ication of cold substances to the epigastrium : r eating. 

Before Stool : Chilliness in the rectum : Colic : 

During Stool : Biting at the anus : Burning at the anus: Chilliness: Colic. 



72 





taste in the mouth, and of food. Little or no thirst. Canine hunger Desire for sweet things. Aversion to bread ; to warm, boiled food ; to meat ; to coffee ; to smoking. If the canine hunger is not satisfied, severe headache results, which is relieved after eating. A little food seems to Jill the stomach full, and causes fulness and distention of the abdomen. Eructations. Pain, tenderness, and swelling of the region of the stomach, relieved by loosening the clothing. Sinking at the stomach. 

Kea, in the morning. Flatulent distention of mien. 

¦ rcerated flatulence. Loud rumbling of flatus ibdomen. 

Weakness. Nervous debility. 

Chlorosis. Emaciation. 

Feel cold. 

Lycop. is one of the noblest monuments to the genius of Hahnemann, as well as one of the most convincing proofs of the homoeopathic doctrines. This innocent substance is developed by potentizing into one of our most valuable remedies for chronic diarrhoea, as met with in weak, chlorotic, dyspeptic, and debilitated persons. The characteristic symptoms are marked, and need no comment. The symptoms of the stool are subordinate. The " chilliness in the rectum," before stool, is a singular but genuine symptom, which further observation may to be characteristic. 

7 

73 





¦re lye. is irequentiy neeaea some otner, 1101 ric remedy, (often nux. vom.) 

70. MAGNESIA CARB. 

lls : Green, watery ; frothy ; with green scum it of a frog-pond. White masses, like lumps w, floating in the green watery stool. Bloody ? ; Green mucous ; Greenish-yellow, slimy, ! ; Brown, fluid ; 

Profuse ; Sour smelling ; 

¦ravations : In hot weather: During dentition : r the day. 

Amelioration : After eating warm soup, (colic.) 

Before Stool : Cutting and pinching in the abdomen : General heat : Rumbling : Emission of flatus. 

During Stool : Colic : Urging : Teneamus. 

After Stool: Tenesmus: Burning at the anus. 

Accompaniments : Anxiety and general feeling of heat. Bitter taste. Sour taste. Tongue coated white. Much thirst for cold water, more in the evening and night ; also for acid drinks. Desire for fruit. Little K petite. Flatulent distention of the abdomen, with rabling, and cutting and pinching colic. 

Debility. 

Much of the ground which should have been occupied by magn. carb. has heretofore been given to coloc. and mere. A better acquaintance with the former will prevent this in futm*e. It is a remedy of the first order in dysentery and infantile diarrhoea. 

74 





sinking t«c the bottom of the vessel and adhering there ; but the watery stool occurs alone. 

71. MERCURIUS SOL. 

(Mercurius Vivus.) 

Eols : Dark green, bilious, frothy ; Whitish wa« Green, mucous; Bloody mucous; Green, slimy ; 

Frequent ; Scanty ; Corrosive ; Sour smelling ; 

Aggravations: From cool evening air : At night: 

In hot weather: During the day: During den- 

Efore Stool : Violent and frequent urging : Nau- Pinching and cutting in the abdomen : Anxanguish, trembling, and sweat, either warm or Chilliness: Chilliness mingled with flashes 

¦ng Stool : Violent and frequent urging : Nauructations: Pinching and cutting colic : Chil- Hot sweat on the forehead : Violent tenesmus : 

¦rStool:r Stool : Violent tenesmus: Cutting and pinchic: Rawness of the anus and adjacent parts: arm sweat on the forehead becomes cold. 

EDompaniments: Open fontanelles. Large head, pale, earthy, yellow. Eyes dull. Gums swollen, ing easily. Tongue swollen, soft, and flabby, g impressions of the teeth on its edges ; coated sh, yellowish. 



75 





Bad smell from the mouth. Teeth feel too long and are sensitive. Taste bitter ; putrid. 

Violent thirst : for cold drinks • for beer. 

Vomiting : bilious ; of bitter mucus. 

Region of liver painful and sensitive to contact. 

Frequent urination. Tenesmus vesicae. 

Great debility. 

Perspiration on the least exertion. 

¦plessness at night, with sleepiness in the day- Eestless sleep. Sour-smelling night-sweat, parly on the head, cold on the forehead. 

Jaundice. 

Few remedies require more careful selection than mere. Its symptoms, though marked and decided, differ more from other remedies in intensity than in quality, and it requires an observing experience to measure this difference. It differs negatively, however, from many other similar remedies, wanting characteristics which they possess. In psoric infants the choice has often to be made between calc, sil., and merc, and must be made with care, as a mistake is not easily rectified. 

72. MERCURIUS CORROS. 

Rls: Bloody, slimy; \ty; Frequent; 

Aggravation : Day and night. 

¦re, during, and after Stool : Constant tenesmus ging to stool : Cutting colic. 

Accompaniments: Tenesmus vesicce. Urine scanty, hot bloody or suvnressed 

76 





P)f mere. corr. are not known. One however, that it is too frequently ntery, to which it is only applicable in great intensity and accompanied istic urinary symptoms, as given 

73. MEZEREUM. 

¦Is : Brown, fecal ; Fermented ; Undigested ; Frequent ; Sour ; Offensive ; 

Bavations : In the evening : After suppression ruplion of thick crusts covering thick pus. 

Before Stool : Chill : Colic. 

During Stool: Increased urging : Colic: Prolapsus 

B* Stool: Chill: Constriction of the prolapsus: ess: Sensitiveness to cold, open air: Painful us, extending to the perineum and urethra, 

Empaniments : Pale, wretched look. Increase a. Tongue coated white or yellow. Bitter Much colic ; cutting, pinching, drawing, rejy rising, stretching, and emission of flatus, tion. Debility. 

¦ses of chronic diarrhoea, with a psoric anam[ez. will sometimes prove to be the remedy whole condition. 

7* 

77 





74. MURIATIC ACID. 

Stools : Fecal ; Watery ; 

Involuntary ; without desire, while passing urine, 

Aggravation : Evening and morning: After a meal: During typhoid fever. 

Before Stool : Rumbling : Colic. 

During Stool: Smarting and cutting in the anus: Burning in the anus : Colic. 

After Stool: Burning in the anus: Protrusion of dark, purple varices. 

Pmpaniments: Taciturnity or ill humor. Tongue like lead, preventing talking. Dryness of the Aversion to meat. Sleepiness in the daytime, isness at night, with bland delirium, and inn to slide down in the bed. Great debility, irer jaw hangs down. 

Perspiration during the first sleep before midnight. Pulse weak and slow, intermitting every third beat. 

To delineate mur. ac. further, would be to give its full indications in typhoid fever, of which the diarrhoea is only an accompanying symptom. It is also highly applicable to diarrhoea with protrusion of blue or dark-purple haemorrhoids. 

75. NATRUM CARB. 

E Stools : Yellow, fecal ; Fecal ; Watery or liquid ; ick mucous ; latter part tinged with blood. Exled with a gush, (watery or liquid stool). 

Aggravations: After taking milk: After eating: 

78 





After taking cold : During a thunder-shower. 

Amelioration : After eating, (stomach symptoms). 

Before Stool: Cutting: Strong urging. 

During Stool: Tenesmus: Burning at the anus. 

After Stool : Pain in the rectum. 

|)mpaniments : 111 humor. Depression of spiruch thirst. Bitter taste of food. Aversion to Gnawing and pressure in the stomach, re)y eating. Stitches in the left hypochondrium, after drinking very cold water. 

IR. carb. is rarely indicated in the treatment rhoea, but as one of the remedies having an ation from milk, it may sometimes be required nic caaes. The stomach symptoms should also ond. 

76. NATRTTM SULPH. 

¦s : Thin, yellow, fluid, ; (fecal ?) Half liquid ; 

Not frequent ; Often painless ; 

Ravations : In the morning, (after rising), ng the day : After farinaceous food. re Stool : Contractive pain in the abdomen, 

E ending into the chest : Pinching : Pains in the >ins and hypogastrium. 

¦ng Stool : Slight tenesmus and burning in the Profuse emission of flatus. 

¦ Stool: Cheerfulness: Happy mood : Burnhe anus. 



79 





80 

THE REMEDIES AND 

at night, painful. Bruised pain in the intestines. Stitches in the region of the liver, and sensitiveness when walking in the open air. Constant uneasiness in the bowels and urging to stool. Passing of large quantities of flatus, mostly fetid. 

¦aritium. Inflammation and suppuration around )ts of the nails. 

Ea.tr. sulph. is one of the most frequently indi-1 remedies in cases of chronic diarrhoea, where oose morning stool is the leading symptom. The lent symptoms are vefy characteristic, but not ssarily present. 

The tendency to " run rounds," or painful suppurations around the finger-nails is often present, and is a strong confirmatory indication. The morning stool differs from that of sulph. in occurring later and after rising. 

77. NICCOLUM. 

Stools : Thin, fecal ; Yellow, mucous ; Coming out with force, (yellow mucous) ; 

Aggravation : After taking milk : In the morning. 

Before Stool : Urging : Pinching : Cutting. 

During Stool : Stinging in the rectum : Violent urging: Tenesmus. 

¦ Stool : Colic : Renewed unsuccessful urging esmus. 

Accompaniments : Hunger, without appetite or 



Much thirst day and night. Nausea, with gulping up of sour water. Distended abdomen. 

Much flatulence, fetid or inodorous. 

¦i remedy resembles several others in the agion after milk, but differs from them all in symptoms. We have had no clinical experiith it as yet. 

78. NITRIC ACID. 

¦Is : Mucous ; Green mucous ; Bloody mucous ; ssted ; Yellowish-white, fluid ; Putrid ; Fetid ; 

Aggravation : On alternate days : During typhoid fever : After dinner : After abuse of mercury. 

Before Stool : Colic : Drawing pains : Cuttings. 

During Stool : Nausea : Colic : Tenesmus. 

¦ Stool : Exhaustion : Irritation, anxiety and uneasiness. 

Accompaniments : Irritability or despondency. Anxiety about the disease. Vanishing of thought. Dulness of the head. Headache, aggravated by the jar and rattle of carriages on the street. Pale, yellowish complexion. Ulcers in the mouth and fauces. Copious flow of saliva. Putrid smell from the mouth. Sour or bitter taste after eating. Aversion to boiled meat; to sweet things; to bread. Appetite for herring ; fat food ; earth, chalk, lime, stavch. Much thirst. Cutting in the abdomen, (in the morning in 

F 

81 





>vi to ct stroii sr siiiGii * 01 sourisn smcii. iik.g log 11 1 1 no 

Night-sweat. Debility. 

Emaciation, especially of the upper arms and 

According to the published symptoms, nitr. ac. resembles alumina, but those symptoms are not confirmed by clinical observation. The appetite for chalk, lime, and similar substances obstinately refuses to j r ield to this remedy, and we are glad to notice that this symptom is not found in Hahnemann's proving. —As one of the remedies having green mucous stools, it should be studied in infantile diarrhoea, particularly after abuse of mercury, or in children of syphilitic parents. 

79. NUX MOSCHATA. 

¦Is : Thin, yellow; (like beaten or stirred eggs). ; Undigested ; Watery ; Slimy ; 

Putrid ; Profuse ; 

¦avation : In children, (girls?): At night: Duritition: From taking cold : In cool, damp •; After milk: After cold drinks: In the g: During typhoid fever. 

¦r eating and drinking, (colic.) n riding, (nausea.) 

E melioration : By application of moist heat, ins. ) 

Before Stool : Cuttings. During Stool : Urging. 

82 





as if more stool would pass. 

!3companiments : Fitful mood : Inclination to h. Mouth very dry. Saliva like cotton. Dryness le mouth, with taste as after eating strongly id food. Chalky, or pappy taste. Little or no it. Craving hunger, but the food eaten oppresses stomach. Nausea, more while riding. Colic, ;e after taking food or drink, relieved by hot, wet s. Urine scanty. 

Great drowsiness. Torpor. Lethargy. 

Cool, dry skin. Disposition to faint. 

Great languor. 

¦he exhausting diarrhoeas of children, accomby great sleepiness, and worse at night, nux is the remedy. 

80. NUX VOMICA. 

E)ls: Thin, brownish, mucous; Thin, bloody, s : Thin, green, mucous ; Dark, thin, fecal ; watery ; Brown, fluid ; Alternating with conori ; 

Frequent; Small; Corrosive; Offensive; 

Pigravation : After debauchery : After abuse of wlic spirits : After drastic medicines or proid drugging: After night-watching: During dice : After taking cold : In the morning, (gencjondition) : After over-exertion of the mind. 

Before Stool: Cutting about the umbilicus: Back' ache, as if broken : Constant urging. 

83 







Bp Stool : Cessation of the pains and tenesmus : g at the anus. 

Accompaniments: Irritability. Over-sensitiveness to external impressions, light, noise, strong smells, jar, etc. Dull headache. Yellowness of the eyes and face. Pale, earthy color of the face. Gums swollen, bleeding. Bad smell from the mouth. Tongue coated thick, dirty yellowish-white. Thirst. Loss of appetite. Aversion to bread, coffee, tobacco, ale. Desire for chalk, brandy, fat food. Putrid, sour, or bitter taste. Hiccough. Nausea, in the morning and after dinner. Intolerance of the pressure of the clothing about the hypochondria. 

Colic : pinching, cutting, contractive, griping. 

Pain, as if the contents of the abdomen were sore and raw. Much flatulence. 

Painful, ineffectual desire to urinate. 

Frequent urging to urinate. 

Drowsiness in the daytime and after eating. 

¦lity. Sinking at the stomach. Desire to sit or n. Sensitiveness to open air, or to a slight 

Emaciation. Chlorosis. 

Nux vom is often of first importance in dysentery, with the characteristic stools and immediate accompaniments. In slow fevers with alternating constipation and diarrhoea, and in chlorosis, as well as jaundice, it holds an important place. In the latter 

84 





stools, decide for this remedy. 

Bmust not be overlooked in the treatment of a because more often used for constipation. 

81. OLEANDER. 

Stools : Thin, yellow, fecal ; Undigested, {food of the previous day) ; Watery ; 

Scanty; Involuntary, (when emitting flatus) ; 

Aggravations : In the morning : In children. 

Before Stool : Rumbling in the abdomen. 

Accompaniments : Pale, sunken face in the morning, with blue rings around the eyes. Canine hunger, and hasty eating without appetite. Thirst for cold water. White-coated tongue. Aversion to cheese. Nausea, and vomiting ; of mucus ; of sour, liquid food ; of yellowish-green, bitter water. After vomiting, ravenous hunger and thirst. 

¦ng and rumbling in the intestines, with emismuch flatulence ; of fetid flatulence like rotten 

Some children are much troubled with frequent soiling the clothes when passing flatus. Oleander cures this, and also more acute attacks of involuntary and of undigested stool, as described above. 

82. OPIUM 

¦s: Watery; Dark, fluid, frothy; sive ; Involuntary ; 

Aggravation : After fright : After sudden joy : 

85 







During Stool : Burning in the anus: Tenesmus. 

Accompaniments: Drowsiness or sopor. Apathy. Stupid, comatose sleep, with rattling breathing, or slumber with half-open eyes, carphologia, and touching surrounding objects. Muttering delirium. Stupid sleeplessness, with frightful visions. Face bloated, dark-red, and hot, or pale, clay color, and sunken. Dryness of the mouth. Aversion to food. Nausea. 

Scanty or suppressed urine. 

Profuse sweat. 

Convulsions ; on entering the fit, loud screams as from fright ; after the fit, sopor. 

Fainting, worse on rising up. 

BM is chiefly useful in diarrhoea during typhoid ut also sometimes indicated in the last stage itile diarrhoea, with the characteristic stools vulsions. 

83. OXALIC ACID. 

¦s : Muddy, brown, fecal ; Watery ; Mucous ody; 

Involuntary, (a constant discharge) ; 

Aggravations: After coffee : In the morning: From motion, (pains.) 

Amelioration : From rest, (pains.) 

Before Stool: Headache: Twisting colic around the navel. 

During Stool : Colic about the navel : Violent urging : Griping pains in the anus, so severe as to cause h H h r\(\ h t ' tl h nrl 

86 







t Accompaniments : Thinking of the symptoms ag(ivates them. Exhilaration. 

Stomach very sensitive to pressure. 

I Frequent pains and soreness about the navel. Cojus urine. 

84. PETROLEUM. 

Stools : Yellowish-watery ; Bloody mucous ; 

Mucous ; 

Profuse, (mucous) ; 

t Aggravation : After deranging the stomach : After ur-kraut: After cabbage: After riding in a car,ge : During pregnancy : In the morning : During >rmy weather. 

Amelioration : By bending double, (colic.) Before Stool : Colic ; cutting and pinching. 

During Stool: Colic: Tenesmus. 

After Stool : Great weakness and dizziness. 

Canine hunger : Urging. 

Accompaniments : 111-humor. Vehemence. Headache in the morning. White-coated tongue. Fetid smell from the mouth. Saliva smells badly. Smell from the mouth like onions, or putrid, slimy mouth. Bitter or sour taste. Aversion to meat ; fat food ; and warm, cooked food. Nausea, and vomiting: in the morning ; when riding in a carriage. 

Pinching colic, arousing one from sleep toward morning, relieved by bending double. Canine hunger 

87 





agining that another person lies sick in the same bed, or speaking of himself in the third person. 

The most striking symptom of petr. is the last one mentioned above, and one that often indicates this remedy in delirious states accompanying diarrhoea, (or other affections). If unable to complete the cure, it will produce a favorable change, and prepare the way for some other remedy. 

Palso useful in chronic diarrhoea with the agions and other symptoms as given above. 

85. PHOSPHORUS. 

Pols : Green mucous ; White watery ; Watery ; lumps of white mucus, or little grains like tal- Undigesled ; Bloody; Brown, fluid; 

Hot; Involuntary; Passing out with force ; 

Sour smelling ; 

Aggravations : In the morning : Day and night : In lean, slender persons : From lying on the left side : From warm food. 

E amelioration : After cold food, ice, or ice-cream, mptoms of the stomach) : After sleeping, {general dition): From lying on the right side. 

Before Stool : Rumbling : Colic : Heat or chilliness : Sudden urging. 

During Stool : Smarting in the rectum. 

After Stool: Burning at the anus: Tenesmus. 



88 





89 

THEIR INDICATIONS. 

sallow, or changeable color of the face, with sunken eyes and blue rings around them. Tongue dry; white ; clean ; moist ; and cracked. Canine hunger at night, with great weakness if not gratified. Loss of appetite. Thirst, with desire for very cold drinks ; for something refreshing. Taste sweetish ; saltish ; sour; bitter after eating. Vomiting of what has been drunk, as soon as it becomes warm in the stomach. Vomiting relieved for a time by ice or very cold food or drink. Burning in the stomach. Heartburn. Rising up of hot, sour ingesta. 

Profuse, pale, watery urine. 

t Emaciation. Nervous debility. Over-sensitiveness ill the senses. Sleepiness in the daytime and afmeals. Sleeplessness before midnight. Frequent waking, with feeling of great heat. Profuse nightsweats. 

I The stools of phos. are hardly characteristic unless 3 little grains like tallow (they resemble more ague frog spawn, or sago, as we have seen them) should prove to be so. The conditions and accompaniments are, however, very peculiar, and are also constant. They will always be present in more or less completeness when this remedy is indicated, and will render a brilliant cure almost certain, if the remedy is given in a proper dose, and is not repeated after the improvement has fully begun. 

The symptoms of phos. are most frequently met with in chronic cases. It is often well to give a singie dose of a high potency of nux vom. a few 





hours before beginning with phos., particularly in cases coming from allopathic treatment. 

86. PHOSPHORIC ACID. 

¦Is : Whitish-watery ; Light, yellow, fecal ; h-gray, fecal ; Undigested ; Greenish-white, ¦i 

Involuntary, (while passing flatus) ; 

Painless ; 

Ravation : During typhoid fever : Prom deg mental emotions : After taking acids : After animal fluids : In young persons who have grown very rapidly 

Accompaniments: Indifference. Quiet delirium and stupefaction. Somnolency. Complexion pale, sickly. Glassy appearance of the eyes. Scorbutic gums, swollen, readily bleeding. Much thirst. Desire for Bething refreshing, or juicy. Dryness of the ith, with viscid, frothy, tenacious mucus. Frelt emission of pale, watery urine, forming a white d at once. 

Profuse perspiration at night. 

Cramps of upper arm, forearm, and wrists. 

Phos. Ac is one of the most prominent remedies for white watery diarrhcea, either chronic or acute. It is characterized by painlessness, and the absence 

90 





87. PODOPHYLLUM. 

Iris : Watery ; with meal-like sediment. enish -watery; Dark yellow, mucous; y-like, mucous ; White, slimy, mucous ; Ik-like, fecal ; Undigested ; 

Profuse, frequent, gushing, painless, {watery 

¦ offensive, like carrion, (yellow, mucous 

Ejravations: In the morning: In the night: ig hot weather : After taking milk and acid together: After eating or drinking: During ion: Lying on the back, (colic). 

¦sliorations : By bending double, lying on the nd by warmth, (colic). 

¦re Stool : Sudden urging : Loud gurgling, as ;r: Violent colic, (or absence of pain). 

¦ng Stool: Prolapsus ani: Colic, (or absence ): Pains in the sacrum. 

B Stool : Prolapsus ani : Exhaustion : Flushes up the back : Colic continues : 

Accompaniments : Headache, alternating with diarrhoea. Rolling of the head during dentition. Perspiration on the head, with coldness of the flesh during dentition. Bad smell from the mouth (at night). Tongue coated yellowish or white. Tongue dry. Loss of appetite. Violent thirst or thirstlessness. Desire for acids. Sour regurgitation of food. Acid * erucmucus. 

91 





Gagging or empty retching. Colic, with retraction of the abdominal muscles. Heat in the bowels. Sleepiness in the daytime, more in the forenoon. Restless sleep, with half-closed eyes, moaning, grinding of the teeth. 

Softness of the flesh, with debility. Sallowness of the skin. Jaundice. 

1 Violent cramps of the feet, calves, and thighs, ith painless watery stools). 

There is no remedy so surely indicated by painless cholera morbus, as podoph. The stools are profuse and gushing, each seeming to drain the patient dry, but soon he is full again. There may also be violent cramps. It would seem that it must prove to be the similar to many cases of cholera, but clinical experience in this direction is still wanting. We hope that some of our colleagues, who have the opportunity, will test it in this fearful scourge. In diarrhoeas of infants it ranks also among the first to be referred to. It most resembles calc. c. 

88. PSORINUM. 

E tools : Dark brown, thin, fluid; Green mucous : ed with blood. 

Very offensive ; like rotten eggs. Frequent ; 

Bggravations : During dentition ; After severe, c disease : At night. 

Accompaniments: Eructations, smelling like rot- 

92 







Ission of fetid, sulphurous flatulence. Soft stool harged with difficulty. Sleepiness in the day- Oreat debility. Profuse perspiration from the vertion, and at night. 

Although the dark fluid stool is very characteristic of psor., the very offensive odor is much more so. This alone often indicates it in infantile diarrhoea, or in cholera infantum, whatever may be the stool ; and it will usually produce a favorable change at once, and often complete the cure. Whether derived from purest gold or purest filth, our gratitude for its excellent services forbids us to inquire or care. The 400 th of Jenichen is the only preparation of it, which we have ever tested. 

89. PULSATILLA NIG. 

¦»ls : Greenish, bilious, watery ; Yellow, mamixed with blood. White and bloody mucous ; 

Bsive ; Corrosive ; Involuntary, (during sleep t); 

¦ avations : At night : After measles: After fat ifter ice-cream: After fruit, (strawberries ?) : obacco : After cold drinks : 

¦lioration : In the open air, or a cool place, il condition). 

Before Stool: Rumbling: Cutting colic: Paina 

93 





y• & y of the back. 

¦r Stool : Colic, as from flatulence : Chilliness, small of the back : Smarting of the anus : 

Rnpaniments : Peevishness, or weeping mood. fill from the mouth. Increase of saliva. Tenaucus in the mouth. Constant spitting, of jotton-like mucus. Bitter taste in the mouth, W food or drink. Putrid taste. Thirstlessthirst for ale or spirits. Loss of taste. Averat; to meat ; to bread ; to milk. 

Vomiting of food ; of bile ; of mucus. 

K Flatulent colic. Painful rumbling of flatulence, ssage of fetid flatus. 

Chilliness. Chlorosis. 

k These kinds of nightly diarrhoea are characteristic 'ULS., and there is scarcely a drug which occas them as often." — Hahnemann. 

90. RAPHANUS SAT. 

Ks : Brown or yellow-brown, fluid; Undi- 

Green liquid ; mixed Avith mucus and blood. 

Frothy, copious, and passing out with much force, (brown, fluid stool). 

¦Aggravations : After taking milk and water, (colic), hen lying down, (nausea) : After eating. 

Accompaniments: Anguish, with dread of death, 

94 





pain an ex aus ion. ic , w 1 c coa ing o c tongue. 

Violent thirst. Constant nausea, or nausea occurring in paroxysms, with faintness and inability to lie down. Vomiting of food, with white mucus ; of bile and water. Vomiting is preceded by shuddering, over the back and arms. Colic. No emission of flatulence by mouth or anus for a long time. Great weakness and languor. 

Little is known clinically of kaphanus, but if its published symptoms prove to be genuine, it is a drug of no small value. Many of the symptoms are decided and peculiar. 

91. RHEUM. 

I Stools : Mucous and fecal ; Thin, brownish, fecal ; ur-smelling; Fetid ; 

Aggravations: When moving about: In children: In infants : In lying-in women : After eating : During dentition. 

Amelioration : By bending double, (colic). Before Stool : Colic : Urging. 

During Stool: Colic: Chilliness. 

After Stool : Tenesmus: Renewed urging, (when moving) : Constrictive cutting colic. 

Accompaniments: Restlessness. Demanding various things with vehemence and crying. Cool perspiration on the face, especially around the nose and mouth. Desire for various kinds of food, which be- 

95 





Be when standing. Restless sleep, with tossing, ig out, and twitchings of the muscles of the and hands. 

Sour smell of the whole body. 

ehe sour-smelling stool has always been regarded le most characteristic symptom of rheum. It is one of the most frequently indicated remedies, still less so on account of its constant abuse 

92. RHODODENDRON. 

Stools : Thin, brownish, fecal ; Undigested ; Spurting out with force; 

Aggravation: In cold, damp weather: During a thunder-shower: After meals: After fruit: 

On rising from the bed : When walking, (nausea). 

Accompaniments : Indifference and aversion to all occupation. Rumbling in the abdomen, and discharge of fetid flatus. Sinking at the stomach. Nausea. General rheumatic pains, brought on by damp, cold, weather, and worse during wet. 

The aggravations distinguish rhodod. 

93. RHUS TOXICODENDRON. 

¦ Is: Watery; Thin, red, mucous; Thin, yelucous; Bloody ; Jelly-like mucous ; streaked md yellow. Yellowish-white, fecal ; 



96 





Yy% iirt / 1/ )i f/i ft/ " ifli" Tllfrhi" W" n1 Ip QlPPOinn^i r f*t Ifl * J.HVULUIUUI y , l^U Ul^llt WUIIC oiGcpiufey. *"'U| Frothy, painless, and odorless, (yellow fluid) ; 

Pivations : During typhoid fever : After drinkwater : After getting wet : In cool damp : After excessive bodily exercise : After a At night : 

Ameliorations : When bending double, and when lying on the abdomen, (colic) : From warmth and continued motion, (general condition) : 

Mre Stool : Constant urging, with nausea and colic : Cutting colic : 

During Stool : Cutting colic : Urging : Nausea. After Stool : Remission of the pains and urging. 

Tenesmus : 

Ejcompaniments : Headache. Restlessness. Pale, :en face, with blue rings around the eyes. Putaste and smell from the mouth. Tongue dry ; or brown; cracked. Increase of saliva. Bitter i of food, especially bread. Metallic taste. Loss ppetite. Desire for oysters. Much thirst, more ight, arising mostly from dryness of the mouth. st for cold water; for cold milk. Nausea. 

Cutting, tearing, and pinching colic. 

Pains in all the limbs. 

¦less sleep. Troublesome dreams, vivid, of iorh and difficulty. 

¦stools of rhus tox. are quite characteristic, -ny of the conditions and accompaniments are uch so. It is frequently applicable in dysenostly after other remedies, and in a .ate stage 



97 





Ethe disease. The craving for cold milk and the laious dreams of excessive bodily exertion, as rung, wading in the snow, hurrying, and the like, are more characteristic of this remedy than of any other. thas been observed that rhus tox. and apis m. not follow each other well. 

94. RUMEX CRISPUS. 

(Stools : Brownish watery ; Thin brownish, fecal ; Fensive ; Generally painless ; Profuse ; 

Aggravations : In the morning, (before rising) ; 

From moving, (nausea) : 

¦>re Stool : Sudden urging, driving one out of Jausea : Colic : 

Accompaniments : Severe headache. Mouth dry. Tongue coated yellow. Nausea with eructations. 

Violent dry cough, excited by tickling in the Larynx, often almost continuous, worse at night ; when walking ; when inhaling cool air ; when talking ; by pressure on the larynx or trachea ; when lying on the left side. Much debility. 

The chief application of rumex is to cases having the characteristic cough, accompanying the diarrhoea. It has also proved useful, however, in morning diarrhoea where sulph. seemed indicated but did not 

98 





95. bAwtrUUMAIIIA CAN. 

Stools: Watery; Thin fecal ; Undigested; 

Aggravations : After coryza and catarrh ; After the pains in the chest : 

Bre Stool: Severe cutting pains: Urging: ng Stool : Discharge of much flatulence : 

Eompaniments : Loss of appetite. White coated ». Desire for piquant, highly seasoned food. a, not diminished by vomiting. Vomiting of water. Profuse salivation, with the nausea and ng. Craving to eat in order to quiet the nau- Frequent discharge of very offensive flatus, debility. 

The aggravations and the nausea are chiefly characteristic of sang. c. 

96. SCILLA. 

¦tools: Dark-brown or black slimy, fluid; in thy bubbles. 

Very offensive ; Painless ; 

tggravations : In the morning, (2 to *l a. m.): Dur the day : During measles : 

Accompaniments : Much viscid mucus in the mouth. Desire for acids. Thirst. Bread tastes bitter. Soup and meat taste sweet. Pressure in the stomach as from a stone. Nausea. Vomiting. Cutting colic. Frequent discharge of very fetid flatus. 

Profuse urine. 

A very careful comparison will sometimes be necessary in order to distinguish scilla from psorinum. 

99 





X II" oLOOIo <*r6 Very iSlUllliir, DUI L.0056 OI oQUI US ill 0 frothy, and there is an absence of the debility which usually accompanies the stools of the other remedy. 

97. SECALE CORN 

Rls : Watery and slimy ; use ; Frequent ; Offensive ; Involuntary ; Sudden attack. 

Aggravations : In childbed : After cholera: After eating, (vomiting) : 

X Before Stool : Cutting and rumbling in the abraen: 

During Stool : Cutting : Great exhaustion : After Stool : Great exhaustion : 

Accompaniments : Anxiety. Fear of death. Pale and sunken face. Eyes sunken deep in the sockets, and surrounded with a blue margin. Dry, thick, viscid, yellowish-white coating on the tongue. Unquenchable thirst. Desire for sour things : for lemonade. Constant nausea, worse after eating. Vomiting: of food ; of bile; of mucus; painless and without effort, with great weakness. Severe anxiety and burning at the pit of the stomach. Burning in the abdomen. Stippression of urine. Voice feeble and inaudible, or hoarse and hollow. 

Cramps in the chest, hands, and toes, Skin cold, blue, shrivelled. 

Great debility. Sudden and great exhaustion. 

Cold, clammy perspiration over the whole body. Aversion to heat or to beina covered 

100 





aversion to being covered, or to heat. This will often distinguish it from many other remedies that have, otherwise, similar symptoms. The choleraic stool is not offensive, except perhaps at first, but that occurring in childbed is so. In cholera morbus it most resembles colchicum. 

98. SEPIA. 

¦Is : Green mucous ; Green slimy mucous ; -like ; Bloody ; 

Blled quickly ; Frequent ; Not profuse ; ; Sour ; Putrid ] 

Privations : After taking boiled milk: During on: In children: After taking meat: 

cc Stool: Nausea: Colic: g Stool: Prolapsus ani: Stool: Exhaustion: Debility: 

Accompaniments : Bad smell from the mouth. Tongue coated white. Putrid or sour taste. Food tastes too salt. Aversion to meat and milk. Sour or fetid eructations. Nausea. Vomiting. Discharge of much offensive flatus. Involuntary urination at night in the first sleep. Sleepiness in the daytime. Frequent waking at night. Waking at three in the morning and inability to fall asleep again. Rapid exhaustion. 

iisf'iiitilo fli*i Ti'liflf**! Trif* fl s*Q*T*fl vfl \i on from hoi led 



101 





Hi l l iv , til n i I. l h / 111j)l(i1 1 1 j ) l (i CAnd'iihinMij Hi i (. (iisiinp^iiisiiiii^j symptoms. It is also applicable in chronic debilitating diarrhoea. 

99. SILICEA 

Stools : Liquid, slimy, frothy ; Mucous ; Bloody ; 

Cadaverous smelling; 

Expulsion difficult; Often painless. 

Mravations: Day and night : In scrofulous chil- During dentition : Before the menses : During ire to cold air, {pain and general condition) : 

¦lioration : From wrapping up warmly, (pains neral condition) : 

¦ng Stool : Chilliness, and nausea in the throat. 

After Stool : Burning and smarting of the anus: 

Accompaniments : Obstinacy. Large head with open fontanelles. Profuse perspiration on the head, sour-smelling, in the first sleep. Waxy paleness. Pale, earthy-colored face. Loss of appetite. Much thirst. Aversion to warm, cooked food. Desire for cold things. Aversion to the mother's milk, and vomiting whenever taking it. Bitter taste in the morning. Sour eructations. Nausea and vomiting, of what is drank, worse in the morning. Hard, hot, distended abdomen. Rumbling of flatulence. K:arceration of flatulence. Discharge of much ofsive flatus. 

Involuntary urination at night. 



102 





Silio. is one of our most powerful and deep-acting remedies, producing radical changes in the whole constitution, and overcoming fundamental psoric derangements. This renders it often indispensable in infantile diarrhoea and cholera infantum. It most resembles calc. c. The characteristic perspiration on the head differs from that of the latter remedy in being more general over the whole head and forehead, and in the sour smell. The forehead is also often cold, but becomes warm if lightly covered, which is a very marked symptom of silic. 

Meucurius should not be given before or after 

100. STRAMONIUM 

Bs : Black, fluid ; id ; Cadaverous ; 

Aggravation : During typhoid fever : Amelioration : After profuse perspiration : Before Stool : Writhing pain in the abdomen: Accompaniments: Loquacious delirium, worse 

E looking at shining objects ; in the dark ; when Pale face. Diminished appetite. Every af food tastes like straw. Violent thirst for quantities of water. Vomiting of mucus ; of bile. Hard tympanitic abdomen Suppression 

The stool of stram. is characteristic when the accompanying symptoms are present. 

103 





101. SULPHUR. 

P)ls : Watery ; Brown watery and fecal ; Green s ; Bloody mucous ; Reddish mucous ; Brown s ; White slimy mucous ; White mucous ; 3d with blood. Undigested ; Bilious ; Change- Frothy; Sour; Fetid; 

Expulsion sudden and often involuntary ; 

Eigravations : In the morning : Early in bed : r taking cold: In damp weather: After taking ; acids : In children : During dentition : After ressed eruptions: After eating and drinking, 

Amelioration : By sitting bent (colic) : 

R Before Stool : Sudden and violent urging, {driving c out of bed in the morning, without pain) : Cut' g colic: Rumbling : 

During Stool : Heat: Warm sweat: Rush of Kod to the head: Chilliness: Fainting: Nausea: lesmus : 

R" Stool: Tenesmus : Burning at the anus: erspiration on the face and feet. 

Accompaniments : Peevishness or melancholy. Open fontanelles. Face pale or sallow. Brown, parched, cracked tongue. Dry tongue in the morning. Bitter taste in the morning. Sweet nauseating taste. Aphthse. Ptyalism. Food tastes like straw. Loss of appetite. Aversion to meat ; to wine. Desire for ale or brandy. Food tastes too salt. Emp- 

104 





Jl cU llcllb t?d/ I 1 1 1 JJ . LjUi * vii\j \JLL (il L l/ \Ai\J\j Ltv A. \j \JT A X tt. 'fit , Constant thirst. Sour eructations, worse after taking milk. Nausea. Vomiting ; of water ; of sour food ; bitter, with cold perspiration on the face. Cutting colic, after a meal, after drinking, better while sitting bent. Pinching colic. Passage of fetid flatus. Sleepiness in the daytime, afternoon, and after sunset. Sleeping with eyes half open. Wakefulness. Waking often. 

Aversion to washing. 

Sulphur has a very wide range of application, being often required for every kind of loose evacuations, by virtue of its similarity, and also, when not distinctively similar, when the appropriate remedies fail to act, or when the improvement which they produce constantly gives way and the patient gets better and worse. The early morning diarrhoea is very characteristic. 

102. SULPHURIC ACID. 

Ktools:K tools : Chopped, saffron-yellow mucous ; Stringy ; thy mucous; Watery ; Green watery ; 

Offensive, (watery stool). 

Aggravations: In children: During dentition : Before Stool : Pressing in the anus : 

During Stool: Burning in the rectum : 

After Stool : Empty, weary, exhausted feeling in the abdomen; Pressing in the anus: 

Accompaniments : Irascibility. Irritability. Rest* 

105 





lessness. Profuse flow of tasteless or sweetish sal iva. Aphthae. Vesicles on the inside of the cheek Aversion to the smell of coffee. Desire for fresh fruits. Loss of appetite. Cold sweat on the forehead when eating, even warm food. Cold water chills the stomach unless mixed with some alcoholic 

The stools and mental symptoms of sulph. ac. are very characteristic, when occurring together, and are mostly met with in children during dentition. 

103. TABACUM. 

(Nicotine.) 

¦?Is: Yellowish, greenish, slimy ; Papescent fecal; lera, without stool, vomiting or thirst. 

Aggravation : At night : 

During Stool : Colic : Tenesmus : 

Ijompaniments : Collapse, coldness, fainting, perspiration, deathly nausea without vomiting, uniting of water when moving. Hiccough. ession of the heart. Feeble, irregular pulse, as or paralysis. 

Tabac. should not be overlooked in cholera iniantum. 

104. TARTAR EMET 

E stools : Light brownish-yellow, fecal ; Watery ; cous ; Bloody ; 

Frequent; Profuse; 

106 





107 

THEIR INDICATIONS. 

¦ravations: During exanthemata : During pneu: In drunkards : 

¦>re Stool : Violent shifting of flatulence withtention of the abdomen : Sharp, cutting colic : 

During Stool : Tenesmus : Nausea : Colic 

¦r Stool : Relief of pains : Tenesmus : Burnthe anus. 

Empaniments : Desire for acids, fruits. Thirst drinks, or thirstlessness. Aversion to milk. tous anxious nausea, straining to vomit, with perspiration on the forehead. Vomiting of food ; of mucus ; with great effort. Vomiting is followed by great languor, drowsiness, loathing, desire for cooling things; pale, sunken face ; dim, swimming 

Bnt and painful urging to urinate, with scanty [y discharge. 

¦itation of the heart. Drowsiness. Somno- Jerking up of the limbs during sleep. 

Although not of frequent use in diarrhoea, tart. Kmet. will repay careful study. Veratrum has doubtless been given many times where the choice should have fallen on this remedy, as the colic, desires, and vomiting are quite similar. 

105. THROMBIDIUM. 

Stools: Thin, brown fecal; Mucous; Frequent; Scanty; 

Aggravations : In the morning ; After eating and 



108 

THE REMEDIES AND 

Before Stool : Pain in the left side of the abdon, with perspiration : Griping pains ; Sore pain the intestines: 

During Stool : Pain in the abdomen continues: 

Tenesmus: Chills in the back: 

After Stool : Tenesmus : Prolapsus ani: Burning in the anus : Great debility : Weakness in the knees ; 

Bmpaniments: Fainting on rising up. Loss tite. 

There has been as yet but little clinical experience with thrombidium. It much resembles nux vom., but has marked and distinctive differences, which must render it a serviceable addition to the materia medica. 

106. THUJA OCC. 

Stools : Pale-yellow watery ; 

Bbly expelled ; Copious ; gurgling like water bunghole. 

Aggravations : In the morning : After breakfast : After coffee: After fat food : After onions: Periodically returning in the morning, always at the same hour : After vaccination : 

Before Stool : Rattling of flatulence : 

During Stool : Passing of much loud flatus 

After Stool: Debility: 

Accompaniments : Much thirst or violent thirst Drink falls audibly into the stomach. Desire for cold food and drink. Rapid exhaustion, causing oppressed and short breath ; irregular and intermittent pulse. Rapid emaciation. 



THEIR INDICATIONS. 

109 

It will hardly be easy to make a niis+ake about thuja. No other remedy has the same combination of symptoms. Gratiola resembles it more than any other, but is easily distinguished by the aggravations and accompaniments of thuja. This remedy is applicable to chronic diarrhoea, particularly when traceable to vaccination, and should not be forgotten in cholera morbus, or in cholera infantum. In the latter affections it has a close resemblance to LAUROCERASUS. 

107. VERATRUM ALBUM. 

Stools: Greenish watery i , with flakes ; Brownish watery ; Blackish watery ; Bloody; Frequent; Profuse, {watery) ; 

Involuntary, (while passing flatus) ; 

I Aggravations : In hot weather: During menstruon: During typhoid fever: At night: By moving d drinking, (vomiting) : 

Before Stool : Severe pinching colic : 

Euring Stool: Paleness: Cold sweat on the fore- I: Pinching colic: Nausea: Vomiting: Weak: Chilliness and shuddering : 

R Stool : Great sinking and empty feeling in men : Weakness. 

Accompaniments : Melancholy. Despair. Vertigo with cold perspiration on the forehead. Hippocratic countenance. Cold, pale, or bluish face and lips. Sunken eyes. Lips dry and dark. Tongue cold, or coated white, with red tip and edges, or 

10 



\s yJ *!¦ I J \J TV , V/l ' jf dill Xjl. ll V l\\ \I . AJ j CD JII L y \J L putrid taste. No appetite, or good appetite. Violent third for large quantities of very cold water and acid drinks. Desire for fruits : for acids. Violent nausea with ptyalism. Violent vomiting ;of froth, ; of ingesta ; of green mucus ; of dark-green or yellow-green mucus; of sour mucus; of bile. Before vomiting, cold hands, becoming hot afterward. Great weakness after vomiting. Pressure in the pit of the stomach. Painful retraction of the abdomen during vomiting. Hoarse, weak voice. Oppressive and spasmodic contractions of the chest. Cold breath. Suppression of urine. 

Bssive anguish, arresting the breathing. Exweakness. Fainting. 

Violent cramps of the extremities. 

Skin cold, blue, remaining in folds when pinched. 

Veratrum is a remedy of great value, and one very often required, but like all others it demands a careful selection, and is not to be given in every case of cholera morbus or of cholera. The most characteristic symptoms are the same in both cases, only more violent in the latter. The immediate accompaniments of the stool, with the thirst and cravings, distinguish this remedy. It is useless to give verat. 

110 





108. ZINGIBER. 

Stools : Brown mucous ; 

Ejgravations : After drinking impure water : After ig a chill from a cold, damp wind : After derangthe stomach : In the morning : (After eating ns) : After sleep, (nausea) : 

Before Stool : Pinching colic. 

During Stool : Passing of much flatus : 

After Stool : Nausea. 

Accompaniments: Acidity of the stomach. Pains in the stomach. The taste of all food remains in the mouth for hours, particularly of bread or toast. Bad, slimy taste. Frequent eructations. Thirst. Much flatulency, causing rumbling and rolling in the bowels. Nausea. 

¦lorrhoidal tumors, hot, and painfully sore, r sitting or lying. 

If the symptoms of zingiber be further confirmed by clinical observation, it will fill an important place in our therapia. The aggravations are peculiar, particularly the aggravation from drinking impure water 

111 







PART 11. 

REPERTORY. 

PATHOLOGICAL NAMES. 

CHOLERA: Ars. Gamph. Carb. veg. Cupr. Jatr, Phos. Phos. ac. Pod. Sec. Sulph. Tabac. Thuj Verat. 

Kphyctica s. sicca : Camph. Carb. veg. Laur, c. 

Kfantum : Aeon. JSth. Ant. c. Ars. Calc. c, ph. Carb. veg. Colch. Coloc. Grot. tig. Elat , Ipec. Iris v. Jatr. Kali b. Laur. Phos, Raph. Sec. BU. Sulph. Tabac. Tart. c. . Verat. 

Rorbus : Aeon. Ant. c. Ars. Camph. Colch, c. Grot tig. Elat. Grat. Ipec. Iris v. Jatr, b. Phos. Phos. ac. Pod. Raph. Sec. Tabac Tart. c. Thuj. Verat. 

E\: Aeon. JEthus. Agar. Aloe. Alum. Ant. c. Apis. Am. Ars Asar. Benz. ac. •om. Bry. Cact. g. Calc. c. Canth. Cast. mm. Chel. Chin. Cm. Cist. Cocc. Coff. )n. Cop. Corn. c. Grot. tig. Cub. Dig. Ic. Ferr. Fluor, ac. Gels. Graph. Gum.gutt, sp. Hip. m. Hyos. Ip. Iris v. lod. 

i r\ *X" xt 





Kali b Kali c. Kali. n. Lach. Laur. Lept. Lith. c, 

»n. c. Here. v. Mez. Mur. ac. Natr. c. Natr. sul. , Nitr. ac. Nux mos. Nux vom. Oleand. Opium. Oxal. ac. Petr. Phos. Phos. ac. Pod. Psor. Puls. Raph. Rheum. Rhod. Rhus. Rum. Sang. c. 

Scill. Sec. Sep. Stram. Sulph. Sulph. ac. Tabac. Tart. c. Thromb. Thuj. Verat. Zing. 

— , chronic: Alum. Amm. m. Ant. c. Apis. Am. Ars. Asar. Borax. Brom. Bry. Gale. c. Caust. Chin. Cist. Coloc. Con. Cop. Ferr. Fluor, ac. Graph. Gum. g. Hep. lod. Kali b. Kali c. Kali n. Lach. Lept. Lith. c. Lye. Magn. c. Mez. Natr. c. Natr. sul. Nice. Nitr. Ac Oleand. Oxal. ac. Petr. Phos. Phos. ac. Pod. Psor. Puls. Raph. Rhod. Rhus. Rum. Scill. Sep. Sil. Sulph. Thuj. Yerat. 

— , infantile : Aeon. jElhus. Aloe. Amm. m. Apis. Arg. nit. Ars. Bell. Benz. ac. Bor. Gale. c. Canth. Carb. v. Cast. Cham. China. Cina. Coff. Coloc. Corn. c. Grot. tig. Dulc. Elat. Graph. Gum. g. Hell. Hep. Ipec. Iris. Kali b. Laur. Lach. Magn. c. Merc. v. Natr. c. Nice. Nitr. ac. Nux mos. Nux vom. Oleand. Phos. Phos. ac. Pod. Psor. Puls. Raph. Rheum. Sep. Sil. Sulph. Sulph. ac. Verat. 

DYSENTERY : Aeon. JEth. Aloe. Alum. Apis. Arg. n. Am. Ars. Bap. Bell. Canth. Caps. Carb. v. Cast. Colch. Coloc. Cop. Cub. Cupr. Dulc. Elat. Gum. g. Hep. Hip. m. Hydroph. Iris v. lod. Kali, b. Magn. c. Merc. v. Merc. corr. Nitr. ac. Nux. v. Ox. ac. Petr. Phos. Psor. Puls. Raph. Rhus 

114 





CHARACTER OF THE STOOLS. 

Alternating with constipation : Ant. c. Bry. Lach. Nux. v. 

Attack sudden : Camph. (Cupr.) Sec. 

Bilious : JEth. Aloe. Ars. Cact. Cham. Cm. Cina. Coloc. Corn. c. Cub. Diosc. Merc. v. Puls. 

B: Aeon. JEth. Aloe. Arg. n. Am. Ars. Benz. Ac Bry. Canth. Caps. Colch. Coloc. Cupr. Dulc. Hip. m. Hydr. Ipec. Iris. v. nit. Merc. v. Nux mos. Ox. ac. Phos. Raph. . Sep. Sil. Sulph. Tart. c. Verat. 

, black: Caps. 

Changeable: Sulph. 

B black : Camph. Chin. Lept. Verat rown : Am. Verat. halk-like: Pod. ray : Aloe. 

— , green : Aloe. Chin. Elat. Iris v. Merc. v. 

, white : Calc. c. Chin. Cop. Hep. , grains or particles : Cub. Phos. , masses like tallow : Magn. c. , yellow: Chel. Coloc. Gels. Tabac. 

Constant discharge : Apis. Ox. ac. 

Copious : Ant. c. Benz ac. Cact. Colch. Cop. Cub. Diosc. Elat. Gum. g. Iris v. Jatr. lod. Kali b. Lept. Magn. c. Nux mos. Pod. Raph. Rum. Sec. Tart. c. Thuj. Verat. 

115 





g. Iris v. Merc. v. Nux v. Puls. Excoriating : see Corrosive. Expulsion difficult : Alum. Gels. Psor. Sil. , only possible when urinating : Alum. forcible, sudden : Cist. Grot. tig. Grat. Gum. g. Jatr Kali b. Natr. c. Nice. Phos. Raph. Rhod. Fecal : Aeon. Alum. Caust. Cina. Coff. Dig. lod. Laur. Mur. ac. Natr. c. Nice. Ox. ac. Rheum. , black : Brom. Cub. Hip. m. Lept. Sulph. Tabac. Tart. c. , brown : Bry. Coloc. Fluor ac. Kali c. Lye. Mez. Ox. ac. Rheum. Rhod. Rum. Tart. c. Thromb. , cream-colored : Gels. , dark : Bap. Carb. v. Hip. m. Nux v. , gray : Calc. c. Cist. Dig. Kali c. , papescent : Hep. , thin : Alum. Bap. Bor. Bry. Carb. v. Cist. Con. Diosc. Gum. g. Hep. Iris v. Kali nit. Lept. Lye. (Natr. sul.) Nice. Nux v. Oleand. Rheum. Rhod. Rum. Sang. Thromb. , white : Dig. Lye. Pod. Rhus. , yellow: Agar. Aloe. Amm. m. Apis. Bor. Calc. c. Cist. Cocc. Coloc. Cub. Dig. Diosc Fluor, ac. Gels. Gum. g. Sep. Iris v. Kali c. Lach. Lith. c. Natr. c. (Natr. s.) Oleand. Phos. ac. Rhus. Tart. c. 

116 







Flakes : Cupr. Verat. Flocculi : Dulc. 

Fluid : see Liquid. Foamy : see Frothy. 

Frequent: Aeon. Apis. Arg. n. Am. Ars. Bell. Bap. Bor. Bry. Cact. Canth. Caps. Garb. v. Cast. Cham. Chin. Cina. Cocc. Colch. Coloc. Corn. c. Cub. Cupr. Dulc. Elat. Grat. Gum. g. Hell. Hyos. Ip. Iris v. Kali b. Merc. v. Merc. corr. Mez. Nux v. Pod. Psor. Sec. Sep. Tart. c. Thromb. Yerat. 

Frothy : Am. Benz. ac. Calc. c. Coloc. Merc. v. Op. Raph. Rhus. t. Sil. Sulph. 

bubbles : Scill. 

Hot: Aloe. Cham. Cist. Phos. 

Involuntary: Ars. Bell. Calc. c. Camph. Carb. v. Chin. Cm. Cop. Cub. Dig. Terr. Hyos. Kali c. Laur. Oleand. Op. Ox. ac. Phos. Rhus. t. 

Khen passing flatus : Aloe. Kali c. Oleand. . ac. Verat. 

with every motion : Apis. 

¦uring sleep : Am. Bry. Con. Hyos. Puls s. 

when passing urine : Aloe. Mur. Ac Liquid : -<Eth. Con. Natr. c. Sil. 

, black : Ars. Scill. Straw 

— , brown : Graph. Magn. c. Nux v. Phos. Psor. Raph. Scill. 

117 





118 

STOOLS. 

Liquid dark: Op. Scill. 

greenish : iEth. Crot. t. Raph. reddish-yellow: Lye. 

yellowish-white : Nitr. ac. 

— yellow : JEth. Coloc. Iris v. Lye. Natr. sul Nux mos. Raph. Rhus. 

Lumpy: Con. Lye. Membranes: Colch 

Mucous : Cact. Caps. Carb. v. Chel. Chin. Cm, Coloc. Dig. Graph. Hyos. Iris v. Lept. Natr. c Nitr. ac. Ox. ac. Petr. Raph. Rheum. Sil. Tart, c. Thromb. 

, adhesive : Caps. 

— , bloody : Aeon. JEth. Aloe. Apis. Arg. n. Bap. Bell. Canth. Caps. Carb. v. Cast. Coloc. Cub. Elat. Gum. g. Hep. Hydroph. Iris v. lod. Merc. v. Merc. corr. Nitr. ac. Nux v. Ox. ac. Petr. Psor. Puls. Sulph. 

, brown : Ars. Grt. Nux v. Zing. , dark : Arg. n. 

, frothy: lod. Sil. Sul. ac. 

— , gelatinous : Aloe. Colch. (Cub^ Hell. Kali b. Pod. Rhus. Sep. 

, granular: Bell. Phos. 

— , green : JEth. Amm. m. Apis. Arg. n. Ars. Bell. Bor. Canth. Cast. Cham. Cina. Coloc. Corn. c. Dulc. Elat. Gum. g. Ip. Laur. Magn. c. Merc. v. Nitr. ac. Nux v. Phos. Phos. ac. P.«or. Sep. Sulph. 





STOOLS. 

119 

Mucous liniiiri nalp ¦ Dnrh v lIIUVVUOj lIUUIUj IiUIV ¦ V/ %ML hJ» f • , red : Canth. Graph. Bhus. Sulph. ,in resinous masses : Asar. c. 

,in shaggy masses : Asar. c. 

tlimy: Aeon. Agar. Amin. m. Apis. Am. Ars. Bor. Broni. Gaps. Carb. v. Cham. Cm. . Goloc. Corn. c. Dulc. Ferr. Gum, g. Magn. r erc. v. Merc. corr. Nux mos. Nux v. Pod. j. Scill. Sec. Sep. Sil. Sulph. Tabac. 

, stringy : Asar. c. Sul. ac. 

Knacious : Asar. c. Caps. Crot. t. Bell ick: lod. 

, thin : see Slimy. , transparent: Cub 

, watery : Arg. n. lod. Lept. 

Bhite : Bell. Cauth. Caust. Cham. Cm. Coco. . Elat. Graph. Hell. Ip. lod. Phos. ac. Pod. Sulph. 

Kellow : Agar. Apis. Asar. Bell. Bor. Brom. n. Chin. Cub. Magn. c. Nice. Pod. Puls. !. Sul. ac. 

Offensive : see Smell. 

Xi : Apis. Arg. n. Ars. Camph. Chin. . Coloc. Crot. t. Ferr. Hep. Hyos. Lye. sul. Phos. ac. Pod. Rhus t. Rum. Scill lulph. 

Eiring out : Jatr. Pod. Thuj. fuse : see Copious. 

Purulent : Am. Ars. lod. 



Scanty : see Small. 

Scrapings, like of intestines : Canth. Coloc. Sediment, meal-like : Pod. 

Shooting out : Cist. Crot. t. Qrat. Rhod. 

X: Aeon. Aloe. Am. Ars. Asar. c. Bell, th. Caps. Cham. Colch. Coloc. Corn. c. Dulc, '0. v. Merc. c. Mez. Nuz v. Oleand. Thromb. 

Smell, acid : see Sour. 

, brown paper burning, like : Coloc. , cadaverous : Carb. v. Sil. Stram. 

P cheese, rotten, like : Bry. eggs, rotten, like : Cham. Psor. 

— , fetid : Arg. n. (Bell.) Calc. c. Cocc. Grat. Hip. m. lod. Lept. Lye. Nitr. ac. Rhus t. Sep. Sulph. 

, musty: Coloc. 

— , offensive : Apis. Ars. Benz. ac. Coff. Corn. c. Graph. Gum. g. Lach. Lith. c. Mez. Nux v. Op. Psor. Puls. Rum. Scill. Sical. Sul. ac. 

— , putrid : Bry. Carb. v. Chin. Coloc. Ip. Nitr. ac. Nux mos. Pod. Sep. Stram. 

— , sour : Am. Bell. Calc. c. Coloc. Dulc. Graph. Hep. Magn. c. Merc. v. Mez. Phos. Bheum. Sep. 

Sulph. 

»— , without, (odorless) : Hyos. Rhus t. inny : Colch. 

(digested : Aloe. Am, Ars. Bry. Chin. Coloc. jon. Ferr. Graph. Hep. Iris v. Lach. Nitr. ac. "iux mos. Oleand. Phos. Phos. ac. Pod. Raph. Ihod. Sang. c. Sulph. 

food of previous day ; Oleand. 

120 





WATERY : Aeon. Agar. Ant. c. Bell. Cact. Calc. (Camph.) Colch. Coloc. Con. Cop. Cupr. Dig. Diosc. Ferr. Fluor, ac. Grat. Gum. g. Hell. Hip. m. Hyos. Ip. Iris v. Jatr. Kali nit. Lach. Lept. Mur. ac. Natr. c. Nux mos. Oleand. Op. Ox. ac. Pod. Phos. Pule. Rhus. Sang. c. Sec. Sulph. Sul. ac. Tart. c. Verat. 

, black : Ars. Kali b. Verat. 

— , brown : Ars. Canth. Chel. Gum, g. Kali b. Rum. Sulph. Verat. 

, clear, (colorless) : Apis, f dark : Nux v. 

, flakes, with : Cupr. Verat. 

, frothy : Elat. Grat. Kali b. Magn. o. 

— , green : Cham. Dulc. Grat. Iris v. Magn. c. Pod. Puls. Sul. ac. Verat. 

, green scum, with : Magn. c. 

¦hite : Benz. ac. Cast. Chel. Dulc. Merc. v. Phos. ac. 

— , yellow : Apis. Ars Bor. Canth. Chin. Crot t. Dulc. Grat. Gum. g. Hyos. Thuj. 

11 

121 





122 

AGGKAVATIONS. 

rDITIONS OF THE STOOLS AND OF THE ACCOMPANYING SYMPTOMS. 

a. Aggravations. 

Acids, after : Aloe. Ant. c. Apis. Ars. Broni. Coloc Lach. Phos. ac. Sulph. 

Acute disease, after: Carb. v. Chin. Psor. 

Eernoon, in the : Aloe. Bell. Bor. Chin. Dulc. Laur. -, 4 to 6 o'clock: Carb. v. -, 4to 8 o'clock : Lye. -, 5 to 6 o'clock : Dig. 

Aged persons, in : Ant. c. Op. 

Air on the abdomen, from cold : Caust. 

Air, in cold : Sil. 

Air, in currents of: Aeon. Caps. Nux v. 

Air, in the open : A gar. Aram. m. Coff. Grat. 

Alone, when : Stram. 

Alternate days, on : Alum. Chin. Fluor, ac. Nitr. ac. , a later hour each time : Fluor, ac. 

Anger, after: Aeon. Cham. 

Autumn, in : Bap. Colch. 

Bathing, after : Ant. c. 

Bed, in : Cub. 

Beer, (ale,) after: Kali b. 

Bending double : Diosc. 

Breakfast, after: Arg. n. Bor. Thuj. 

Cabbage, after : (Bry.) Petr. 

Catarrh or coryza, after : Sang. c. 





v^hest, atter pains in the ; rising, c. 

Children, in : (see also Dentition.) iEthus. Benz. ac. Ckam. Cm. Hell. Ipec. Nux mos. Oleand. Rheum. Sep. Sil. Sulph. Sul. ac. 

, fat : Gale. c. 

, fontanelles, with open: Gale. c. Merc. s. Sil. 

Sulph. 

§ hilly persons, in : Asar. c. hocolate, after : Bor. Lith. c. Cholera, epidemic, during: Camph. 

, after an attack of: Sic. 

loffee, after : Canth. Gist. c. Fluor, ac. Ox. ac. Thuja. 

Cold, after taking : Aeon. Aloe. Ars. Bell. Bry. Caust. Cham. Chin. Coff. Dulc. Elat. Graph. Ip. Natr. c. Nux mos. Nux vom. Sulph. Zing. 

, becoming, when : Gocc. 

— drinks : Ant. c. Ars. Bell. Bry. Carb. v. Cocc. Dulc. Hep. Hip. m. Lept. Natr. c. Nux mos. Puls. Rhus. Sul. ac. 

food : Ant. c. Coloc. Lye. Puls. weather : see Weather. 

Coolness of evening : Merc. v. Constipation, after: Alum. Contact, from : Bell. Colch. Covered, when : Sec. 

Damp weather : see Weather Darkness, from : Stram. 

Day, during the: Amm. m. Canth. Cm. Gum. g 

123 







Debility, during : Asar. c. 

Btion, during : JEth. Arg. n. Ars. Benz. ac. '. Gale. c. Cham. Chin. Coloc. Dulc. HelL Magn. c. Merc. v. Nux mos. Pod. Psor. Bum. Sep. Sil. Sulph. Sul. ac. 

tinner, after: Alum. Amm. m. Nitr. ac. Nux v. raft, after exposure to : Aeon. 

Drastic medicines, after : Nux v. 

Drinking, after: Ars. Caps. (Cm.) Crot. t. Ferr. Nux mos. Pod. Sulph. Thromb. Verat. 

, cold drinks : see Cold drinks. , impure water : Zing. 

, on a full stomach : Bry. , too much water: Grat. 

Drugging, after : Mix v 

B after: (see also After meals.) Aloe. Arg. n. Bor. Carb. v. Cist. Coloc. Con. Corn. c. tig. Ferr. Hep. lod. Lach. Lye. Nux mos. Raph. Rheum. Sec. Sulph. Sul. ac. Thromb 

Eaciated persons, in : Calc. c. lod. Phos. otions, depressing : Coloc. Gels. Phos. ac. ption, after suppression of: Hep. Mez. Sulph. ming, in the : Aloe. Bor. Boy. Canth. Caust 

Polch. Kali c. Lach. Merc. v. Mez. Mur. ac. nthemata, after suppression of: Bry. 

, during : Ars. Chin. Scill. Tart. c. Exercise, bodily, after : Rhus. Farinaceous food after* Natr s 

124 





C 0%l ft\/\rl off op • I"^qvV\ tr "Pul" 1 HPVint IdlIW wU | d I Ivl f '*' I * '"" V • I llli*l. iXI ill • 

, hectic : Asar. c. 

, typhoid : Alum. Am. Ars. Bell. Bap. Bry. Hydroph. Hyos. Laeh. Mur. ac. Nitr. ac. Nux nios. Op. Phos. ac. Rhus. Stram. Verat. 

Forenoon, in the : Gum. g. 

Euit, after: Ars. Bor. Chin. Cist. Coloc. Lach, Lith. c. Puls. Rhod. 

, with milk : Pod. 

Glistening objects, looking at: Stram. Grief: Coloc. Gels. Phos. ac. 

Ground, after standing on damp : El at. Hair, after cutting : Bell. 

Headache, after: Pod. 

Hearing water run : Hydroph. 

Hydrocephalus acutus, during : Bell. Hell. Indignation: Coloc. 

Infants, in nursing : Bor. Coff. Rheum. Injuries, after mechanical : Am, 

Jaundice, during : Dig. Nux v\ Joy, sudden: Goff. Op. 

Lead-poisoning, after: Alum Light, bright : Bell. Colch. 

Loss of fluids, after: Garb. v. Ghin. Phos. ac. Lying-in, during : Hyos. Rheum. Sic 

Lying : Diosc. Raph. on the back: Pod. left side : Am. Phos. 

Magnesia, after abuse of: Nux v. 



125 





(VIG3lj 3TiGP 3 ¦ JIJSO /\TTCP DP©3KT3£^j OtC»^ xxUUj Amm. m. Aloe. Ars. Bor. Brom. Chin. Coloc. Con. Mur. ac. Natr. c. Rhod. 

Measles, after: Chin. Puls. , during : Scill. 

Meat : Ferr. Sep. , fresh : Gaunt. — — , smoked : Calc. c< 

Melons: Zing. 

Menses, after : Graph. , before : Boy. Sil 

, during : Amm. m. Boy. Verat. Mental exertion, after : Nux v. Mercury, after abuse of: Hep. Nitr. ac. 

I ilk: Ars. Bry. Gale. c. Con. Kali c. Lye. Natr. c, Nice. Nux mos. Sulph. 

, boiled: Sep. 

and acid fruit : Pod and water: Raph. 

Morning, in the : JEth. Alum. Amm. m. Ant. c. I Apis. Arg. n. Boy. Bry. Cact. Cist. Cop. Corn. c. Fluor, ac. Hip. m. lod. Kali b. Kali nit. Lith. c. Lye. Mur. Ac Natr. sul. Nice. Nux mos. Nux v. Oleand. Ox. ac. Petr. Phos. Pod. Rum. Scill. Sulph. Thromb. Thuj. Zing. 

, after rising : JEth. Natr. s. , before rising: Bor. 

Motion : Aloe. Apis. Am. Bell. Bry. Golch. Coloc. llp. Ox, ac. Rheum. Runi; Tabac. Yerat 



126 





News, bad : Gels. 

Bat: Aloe. Ant. c. Arg. n. Ars. Btv. Brom. Canth. Caps. Caust. Cham. Chel. Chjin Colch. Cub. Dulc. Graph. Hip. in. Ip. Iris ali c. Lach. Lith. c. Merc. v. Nux mos. Pod . Rhus. Tabac. Verat. 

, after midnight : Arg. n. Ars. Hip. m. Lye. Night-watching : Nux v. 

Noise : Cocc. Nitr. ac. Nux v. , sudden : Bell. Bor. 

Nursing, after: Grot. t. Onions : Thuj. 

Opium, after abuse of: Nux v. 

Overheating, after: Aeon. Aloe. Ant. c. Elat. Oysters : Brom. Lye. 

Kiodically, at same hour: Thuj. -, an hour later each time : Fluor, ac, -, at same time of year : Kali b. 

Pregnancy, during : Ant. c. Lye. Petr. Pressure: Bell. 

— , about the hypochondria : Aeon. Arg. n. Car^t Coff. Lach. Laur. Lye. Merc. v. Nux v. 

,at umbilicus : Crot. t. 

Pneumonia, during : Tart. c. 

Quinine, after abuse of: Ferr. Hep Rest, during : Rhus. Mod. 

Rheumatism, after: Kali b. 

Riding, when : Cocc. Nux m. Petr. Rising from bed : Rhod. 

127 





I o Ifl vj up ¦ • tj* ]-*• • 

Scrofulous persons, in : Calc. c. Merc. v. Sil 

Shining objects, looking at: Btram. 

Sitting : Diosc. erect : Bry. 

Sleep, after: Bell. Bry. Zing. 

Slender persons, in : Phos. 

Small-pox, during : Ars. Chin. Tart. c. 

Kof broth : Golch. sggs : Golch. at meat: Golch. ish : Golch. bod : Golch. strong : Colch. ISTux v, 

Smoking : Brom. 

Sour-kraut: Petr. 

Spirits, after abuse of: Ars. Nux v. Tart. c. 

Spring, in : Lach. 

Standing : Aloe. 

Stomach, after deranging : Petr. Zing. 

Strain, after: Bhus. 

Summer, in : (see also Hot weather.) Aeon. -<Eth 



Sun, in bright : Agar. , hot : Camph. 

Supper, after : Iris v. 

Swallowing saliva, when: Colch. 

Thinking of the pain, when: Ox. Ac, 

Tobacco: Cham. Puls. 



128 





Vaccination, after: Thuj. Veal, after eating : Kali nit. Vexation : Coloc. 

Walking, when : Alum. Aloe. Warm room, in : Apis. 

food: Phos. 

Water, hearing run : Hydroph Weather, cold : Dulc. 

, colder, when becoming : Dulc. 

, damp : Agar. Aloe. Rhod. Rhus. Sulph , , cold : Dulc. Nux mos. RLas. , dry : Alum. 

— , hot: Aloe. Bell. Bap. Bry. Colch. Lach. Magn. c. Merc. v. Pod. Yerat. 

, , damp : Colch. 

, , with cold nights : Aeon. , stormy : Petr. 

, warmer, when becoming : Bry Wet, after getting : Aeon. Rhus. Wind, after exposure to cold : Aeon. 

, cold, damp : Zing. 

Young persons of rapid growth, in : Phos. ac. 

b. Ameliorations. 

E, in open: Diosc. Puls. , after: Aloe. 

tsnding double : Aloe. Bell. Cast. Chin. Ctloo. Cop. Iris v. Laeh. Petr. Pod. Rheum. Rhus. Sulph. 

I 









Cold applications: Lye. 

Cool place, in : Puls. 

Drinks, cold : Phos. 

Eructation : Grat. Hep. Lye. 

Eating, after: Arg. n. Bronx. Diosc. Grat. Hep. lod. Lith. c. Lye. Natr. c. Nice. Sang. c. Flatus, by passing : Aloe. Cora. c. Kali nit. Hep. Mez. 

Food, acid : Arg. n. , cold : Phos. 

Heat, moist : Nux m. 

Ice-cream : Phos. 

Loosening the clothing : Hep. Lye. 

Lying, on abdomen : Color. Rhus. , on side : Pod. , on right side : Phos. 

Milk, hot : Crot. t. 

Motion : Coloc. Cub. Diosc. Rhus. 

Perspiration, profuse : Stram. 

Pressure : Cast. Coloc. Diosc. Gum. g. 

Rest, during : Ip. Ox. ac. 

Rising from bed : Cub. Diosc. Mez. 

Rubbing : Diosc. Lye. 

Sleep, after : Alum. Crot. t. Phos, 

Smoking : Coloc. 

Soup, after warm : Aeon. 

Stretching : Mez. 

Vomiting, after: Asar. c. 

Warm applications: Alum. Cast. Nux mos. Pod 

130 







Wrapping up warmly: Sil. 

ACCOMPANIMENTS OF THE EVACUATIONS. 

a. Before Stool. 

Komen, colic : Alum. Aloe. Arg. n. Bell. Bap. or. Bry. Cact. Canth. Caps. Cham. Chin. Dlch. Coloc. Diosc. Dulc. Gels. Graph. Gum. g. ell. Hip. ni. Ip. Kali c. Kali nit. Lept. Lye. ez. Mur. ac. Natr. sul. Nitr. ac. Ox. ac. Petr. hos. Pod. Puls. Eheum. Rum. Sep. Verat. ing. 

— , cutting pains : Aeon. JEth. Agar. Ant. c. Ars. Bry. Caps. Carb. v. Cast. Chel. Coloc. Con. Dig. Grat. Iris v. Laur. Magn. c. Merc. v. Merc. c. Natr. c. Nice. Nitr. ac. Nux mos. Nux v. Petr. Puls. Rhus. t. Sang. c. Sec. Sulph. Tart. c. 

, drawing pains : Nitr ac. 

Idistention, feeling of: Fluor, ac griping : Bell. 

, heat : Bell. 

, left side, pain in : Thromb. 

— , pinching pains : iEth. Agar. Bell. Canth. Cast. Cm. Fluor, ac. Gum. g. Kali c. Magn. c, 

131 





Ahrlnmon rumhlinn ratfiinn nf flafiiQ ¦ Haot O<\<t «iw uuiuviij i uiiiiiiiiiUj i uniiiiu \i i iiaiuw ¦ vy t*v. v* v/ i*ou Chel. Grat. Iris v. Kali c. Lach. Lept. Mur. Ac Oleand. Phos. Puls. Sec. Sulph. Tart. c. Thuj. 

, tearing pains : Dig. Rhus. 

R-, twisting pains : Caust. Ox. ac. Stram. uish : Merc. v. 

Anus, burning pains : Fluor, ac. , pressing : Sul. ac. 

Anxiety : Ars. Cham. Crot. t. Merc. v. Back, pains in : Nux v. Puls. 

Chilliness : Ars. Benz. ac. Dig. Merc. v. Mez. Phos. 

P mingled with heat : Merc. v. ing : Dig. 

Ftus, passing: Aloe. Gels. , hot : Cocc. 

Groins, pain in: Natr. sul. , pressing in: Cast. Thromb. 

Headache : Ox. ac. 

Heat: Crot. t. Magn. c. Merc. v. Phos. 11l humor: Bor. Gale. c. 

Intestines, burning : Aloe. 

, gurgling as of fluid running : Pod. , prickling : Aloe. 

, sore pain: Thromb. Lassitude : Rhus. 

Navel, pain about: Aloe. Amm. m. Caps. Fluor ac. Grat. Nux v. Ox. ac. 

Nausea : Aeon. Biy. Calc. c. Chel. Dulc. Grat Hell. Ip. Merc, v, Rhus. Rum. .Sep. Tart. c. 

132 







Pelvis, fulness and weight in : Aloe. 

Perspiration : Aeon. Bell. Dulc. Merc. v. Thromh Ptyalism : Fluor, ac. 

Rectum, chilliness in : Lye. Tenesmus : Merc. v. Merc. c. Thirst: Ars. 

B: Aloe. Amm. m. Bor. Boy. Canth. Cist. ?. Corn. c. Gum. g. Kali b. Kali nit. Lept. . v. Merc. c. Natr. c. Nice. Nux v. Phos. m. Rhus. Sang. c. Sulph. 

, irresistible : Cist. 

¦ sudden : Cist. Hip. m. Kali c. Phos. Pod ph. 

Vomiting : Ars. Ip. 

b. During Stool. 

Bn, colic: Alum. Apis. Arg. n. Canth. Caps. . Coloc. Cop. Corn. c. Crot. t. Dulc. Hip. . Kali c. Lye Magn. c. Mez. Mur. ac. Nitr. :. ac. Petr. Pod. Rheum. Rhus. Sil. Tabac. c. 

— , cutting pains : Aeon. Agar. Aloe. Caps. Chel. Coloc. Iris v. Kali nit. Merc. v. Merc. c. Rhus. 

, drawing in of: Agar. , fermentation : Agar. , gnawing pains : Kali b. 

12 

133 





» griping pains . pis. lnromo. , left side, pain in: Thromb. , pinching pains: A gar. Canth. Merc. v. Verat , rumbling: Chel. Corn. c. , tearing pains : Aloe. Cop. , twisting pains: Boy. 

Inguish : Merc. v. nus, biting at : Lye. 

— , burning or heat: Aloe. Ars. Bry. Canth. Carb. v. Cast. Corn. c. Gum. g. Hip. m. Iris v Lach Lye. Mur. ac. Natr. sul. Natr. c. Op. 

t, pain : Canth. Chin. Mur. ac. Ox. ac. , prolapsus : Pod. Sep. 

, smarting: Agar. Chin. Kali c. Mur. ac. Anxiety : Cham. Merc. v. 

Back, chill in : Thromb. , pain : Nux v. Puls. 

Chill, shaking : Puls. Verat. 

Chilliness : Ars. Bry. Con. Cop. Ip. Lye. Merc, v Rheum. Sil. Sulph. Thromb. Verat. 

, mingled with heat: Merc. v. Drowsiness : Bry. 

Eructations : Cham. Dulc. Merc, v Exhaustion : Sec. Verat. 

Fainting : Sulph. 

Flatus, passing of: Agar. Aloe. Arg. n. Corn, c Gum. g. Hip. m. Sang. c. Zing. 

, fetid : Cast. 



134 





Head, congestion to : Sulph. , heat in : Ox. ac. 

t, fore-, cold sweat on : Verat. , warm sweat on : Merc. v. , tensive pain : Coloc. 

Heat: Dulc. Merc. v. Sulph. Haemorrhoids : Brom. Fluor, ac. Hunger: Aloe. 

Intestines, bruised pain in : Apis. Navel, pain about: Fluor, ac. Kali b. 

Nausea : Agar. Ars. Bell. Cham. Chel. Coloc. Crot. t. Ip. Merc. v. Nitr. ac. Sil. Sulph. Tart. c. Verat. 

Paleness : Calc. c. Ip. Verat. 

Perspiration : Cham. Crot. t. Dulc. Merc. v. Thromb. , warm : Sulph. 

Rectum, burning in : Alum. Aloe. Amm. m. Ars. Bor. Con. Corn. c. Graph. Sul. ac. 

, pain : Ant. c. 

— , protrusion : Ant. c. Canth. Dulc. Fluor, ac. Mez. 

, scraping : Crot. t. , smarting : Phos. , stinging : Nice. 

, tearing pains : Calc. c. Sacrum, pain in: Pod. 

Shuddering, Bell. 

Stomach, burning in : Hip. m. , drawing in of: Agar. 

Thirst : Bry- Cham Chin. Dulc. 

135 





Tenesmus : Aeon. -<Eth. Aloe. Alum. Amm. m Apis. Ars. Bell. Bap. Caps. Colch. Coloc. Con. Cop. Corn. c. Hell. Hip. m. Hydroph. Iris v Kali b. Kali nit. Laur. Magn. c. Merc, v Merc. c. Natr. c. Natr. sul. Nice. Nux v. Op. Petr. Sulph. Tabac. Tart. c. Thromb. 

Urging : Aloe. Apis. Arg. n. Benz. ac. Canth. tGum. g. Hell. Kali b. Magn. c. Merc. v. Merc. c. Mez. Nice. Nux mos. Ox. ac. Rhus. 

Urination, involuntary: Alum. 

Vertigo: Cham. 

Vomiting : Ars. Bry. Dulc. Ip. Verat. 

c. After Stool. 

Abdomen, burning in : Kali b. 

, colic : Amm. m. Diosc. Nice. Puls. Rheum. 

— , cuttings : Ars. Coloc. Kali nit. Lept. Merc. v. Merc. c. Pod. Rheum. 

, empty feeling : Sul. ac. Verat. , pinching : Kali c. Merc. v. , pressing in : Grat. 

, rumbling : Chel. , sinking : Verat. 

, weakness in : Diosc. Lept. Sul. Ac Air, aversion to cold, open : Mez. 

Anus, biting in: Canth. 

— , burning in : Aloe. Ars. Boy. Canth. Caps. Carb. v. Cast. Coloc. Cdhi. c. Gum. g. Hell. Tvi'<t i) Tfnli o TTnli nit T noh T mir "Matrn n 

136 





Natr. sul. Nux v. Phos. Sil. Sulph. Tart. c. Thromb. 

Anus, itching : Aloe. , pains : Coloc. , pressing : Sul. ac. , pricking : Iris v. , prolapsus : Pod. Thromb. , pulsation : Hip. m. 

— , smarting : Agar. Canth. Graph. Gum. g. Hell. Nux mos. Puls. Sil. 

— , soreness : Alum. Apis. Graph. Gum. g. Merc. v. Nux mos. 

, stinging : Canth. Kali nit, , weight: Aloe. 

Anxiety : Nitr. ac. 

fck, flashes of heat up : Pod. — , pain in : Caps. 

, small of, chilliness : Puls. , throbbing : Alum. 

Cheerfulness: Bor. Natr. sul. Chilliness : Canth. Grat. Mez. Drowsiness : Bry. 

Exhaustion : Nitr. ac. Pod. Sec. Sep. F< rat. Fainting : Crot. t. 

b^oi'ds : Aloe. Brom. Diosc. Graph. lue : Mur. ac. 

Heat: Bry. 

Hunger, canine : Petr. 

Irritation, ill-humor: Nitr. ac. Knees, weakness in : Thromb. 



137 





, pressing in : Crot. t. 

ksea : Aeon. Gaunt. Crot. t. Kali b. Ox. ac. Zing -, with retching : Kali b. 

E station of heart : Ars. Con spiration : Ars. 

, cold, on face : Sulph 

,on feet : Sulph. 

Xi, burning in : Amm. m. Ars. Corn. c. am : Natr. c. rolapsus : Crot. t. Iris v. Mez. 

, becomes constricted : Mez. , stitches: Cham. 

r tingling : Chin. weak feeling : Lept. 

Kof colic tenesmus and urging : Aeon. Alum. Canth. Cham. Colch. Coloc. Corn. c. Oum. ux v. Rhus. Tart. c. 

,of head symptoms : Corn. c. Shuddering : Canth. 

, after drinking : Gaps. 

Stomach, pressure in : Crot. t. 

Stool, feeling as though more would pass : Nux mos. Sweat: Aeon. 

,on forehead : Crot. t. , cold : Merc. v. 

, warm beoomes cold and sticky : Merc. v. 

Bus : Amm. m. Bell. Bap. Boy. Ganth. Gaps. ? Cub. Hydroph. Kali b. Kali nit. Lach . c. Merc. v. Merc. c. Nice. Phos. Rheum Sulph. Tart. c. Thromb. 

138 





Thirst : Caps. Dulc. 

Urging, unsatisfied : JEtK. Crot. t. Dig. Merc. c. Nice. Petr. Rheum. 

Vertigo : Petr. 

Water- brash : Gaust. 

Weakness : Ars. Boy. Calc. c. Carb. v. Con. Ip. Mez. Petr. Sep. Thromb. Thuj. Verat. 

GENERAL ACCOMPANIMENTS 

1. Mind and Mood. 

Apathy : Op. Phos. ac. Anger: Aloe. 

Anguish : Ars. Camph. Raph. Verat. 

Anxiety : Aeon. Canth. Carb. v. Magn. c. Sec. , concerning the illness : Nitr. ac. 

Aversion to being disturbed : Gels 

looked at : Ant. c. touched : Ant. c. 

t downward motion : Bor. light: Camph. 

B mental or bodily exertion : Corn. c. Hep 

— noise : Kali c. Nitr. ac. Nux v. — open air : Nux v. 

K sound of scratching on cloth : Asar. c. washing : Sulph. 

139 





140 

GENERAL ACCOMPANIMENTS. 

Carphologia : Hyos. Op. Changeable mood : Alum. 

Crying : Bell. Bor. Cham. Cm. 

tslirium : Bell. Bry. Hyos. Mur. ac. Op. Phos. Ac, Stram. 

Depression, sadness, despondency, melancholy 

Chel. Gum. g. Hep. Kali b. Natr. c. Nitr. Ac, Puls. Sulph. Verat. 

re to be carried : Cham. naked : Hyos. -— — quiet : Gels. 

Desire for many things rejected when offered 

Cham. Cm. 

Distrustful mood : Ant. c 

Excitability : Agar. Goff. Phos Exhilaration : Ox. ac. 

Fear of being alone : Ars. 

of death : Aeon. Ah. Raph. Sec. Fitful mood : Nux mos. 

Homesickness : Caps. 

Imagination that another person is sick: Petr. Indifference : Phos. ac. Rhod. 

Intoxication : Gels. 

Irritability, ill-humor: iEth. Amm. m. Bell. Bry. Canth. Cham. Colch. Dulc. Hep. Hydroph. Ip. Kali b. Kali c. Mur. ac. Natr. c. Nitr. ac. Nux v. Petr. Phos. Puls. Rheum. Sulph. Sul ac. 

Large, things seem too : Hyos. Laugh, tendency to : Nux mos. Loquacity : Lach. Stram. 



Obstinacy: Sil. 

Over-sensitiveness : Coff. Colch. Nux. v. Phos Sentimental mood : Ant. c. 

Seriousness : Alum. 

Startled, easily : Bell. Bor. Kali c. Thought, vanishing of: Nitr. ac. 

r wandering of: Apis. Iness : Calc. c. 

2. Head. 

Fontanelles open : Gale. c. Merc. t. Sil. Sulph. Headache : Hip m. Kali nit. Petr. Pod Rhus. Rum. Head, congestion to : Ferr. , dulness of: Asar. c. Corn. c. Nitr. ac. Nux v. , hot : Bell. Bor. , fore-, pain in : Apis. , large : Calc. c. Merc. v. Sil. , pressure : Asar. c. , rolling of: Bell. Pod. , sweat on : Calc. c. Sil. , when sleeping : Calc. c. Merc. v. Pod. , sour-smelling : Merc. v. Sil. , forehead : Tart. c. , , when sleeping : Merc. v. , , warm : Crot. t. 

141 





10 : Aeon. Agar. Alum. Crot. t. Kali b. Verat, air, in open : Agar. morning, in : Agar. rising, when: Aeon. sun, in bright : Agar. vomiting, when : Crot. t. 

3. Eyes. 

Eyes, burning in: Rhod. 

kblue rings around : Ars. Corn. c. Cupr. Ip Jatr. Oleand. Phos. Rhus. Sec. 

, dim, dull : Merc. v. Tart, c , fixed : Camph. 

, pains in : Apis. , staring : Laur. 

, sunken : Camph. Cupr. Phos. Sec. Yerat. , swelling over: Kali c. 

, yellow : Chel. Con. Corn. c. Dig. Nux v. Eyelids, itching of: Gum. g. 

4. Nose. 

Nose, boring in : Gin. , picking of: Gin. , paleness around : Gin. 

5. Face. 

tieeks, red : Caps. Cham. Ferr. cc, altered : iEth. Cupr. 

, bluish : Cupr. Dig. Yerat. 

, changeable color: Phos. 

142 





Face, cold : Bell. Camph. Cupr. Verat. , collapsed : JEth. Camph. , deathlike : Ars. Canth. Verat. , distorted : Camph. Cupr. , dull : Corn. c. Merc. v. 

, earthy : Ars. Bor. Lye. Merc. v. Nux. v. Op. Sil. 

— , flushed : Aeon. J^th. Bell. Caps. Ferr. Lye. Phos. 

, when lying : Aeon , dark red : Op. 

, gray : Laur. 

, greenish : Carb. v. , heat in : Corn. c. Op. , livid : Camph. Laur. 

— , pale : Arg. n. Ars. Bell. Bor. Camph. Canth. Carb. v. Cm. Colch. Cupr. Dig Ferr. Hell. Jp. Jatr. lod. Kali b. Merc. v. Mez. Nitr. ac. Nux v. Oleand. Op. Phos. Phos. ac. Rhus. Sec. Sil. Stram. Sul. Tart. c. Verat. 

, around the nose and mouth : Cm , when rising : Aeon. 

-, sallow : Sulph. , sickly : Phos. Ac 

— , sunken : Arg. n. Corn. c. Laur. Oleand. Op. Rhus. Sec. Tart. c. 

, sweat on, cold : Camph. , cool : Rheum. , when eating : Sul. ac. 

, swollen : Hell. Kali c. Op. 

— , yellowish : Ars. Corn. c. Dig. lod. Kali b. 

143 





144 

GENERAL ACCOMPANIMENTS. 

Ission of anguish : JEth. Canth. Cupr, ixhaustion : Rapb. >am : Ilnpb. wretched : Mez. 

¦black: Ars. Verat. blue: Ars. Cupr. Verat. cold : Ars. Cupr. Verat. 

¦ cracked: Ars. Bry. Caps. dark: Aeon. Ars. 

fdry : Aeon. Ars. Arg. n. Bry. Crot. t. Verat , red : Aloe. 

, swollen : Bry. Caps. 

6. Mouth, 

Aphtha; : Ars. Bor. Corn. c. Dulc. Gum. g. Hell Hip. ra. lod. Merc. v. Nitr. ac. Sulph. Sul. ac. 

Chewing motion : Bell. 

Ci bleeding : Carb. v. Merc. v. Nux v. Phos. ac. spongy : Dulc. swollen : Merc. v. Nux v. Phos. ac. 

Mouth, bleeding from : Bor. Hip. m. , burning in : Hip. m. Iris v. Jatr. , dry : Cham. Cup. Hip. m. Jatr. Kali b. Mur. 

INux mos. Op. Rum. frothy mucus in : Phos. ac. hot: Bor. Colch. open : Bell. — , sore : Dig. 

, mucus, viscid, in : Phos. ac. Puls. Scill. Palate, wrinkled : Bor. 



, bloody : Ars. , fetid : Dig. Hip. m. Petr, , frothy: Kali b. 

— , increased : Ant. c. Bell. Garb. v. Chin. Colch. Dig. Dulc. Grat. Hell. Hip. m. Hydroph. Ip Iris v. Jatr. lod. Kali b. Merc. v. Mez. Nitr. aa Puls. Rhus. Sang. c. Sul. Sul. ac. Verat. 

, like cotton : Nux mos. Puls. , oily : Cub. 

, salt: Kalib. 

, soap-like : Dulc. , sweetish : Dig. , yellowish : Hip. m. 

Smell from the mouth, fetid : Cast. lod. Kali nit. Lye. Nux v. Petr. Pod. Puls. Sep. 

, like onions : Petr. 

, putrid : Lye. Nitr. ac. Petr. Rhus. 

iaste, bitter : Aeon. Aloe. Aram. m. Am. Ars. Bry. Cham. CheJ. Chin. Coloc. Corn. c. Elat. Graph. Hep. Hip. m. Iris. v. Lye. Magn. c. Merc. v. Natr. c. Nitr. ac. Nux v. Petr. Phos. Puls. Sil. Sulph. Verat. 

, ,of everything except water : Aeon. 

, ,of food : Asar. c. Bry. Chin. Rhus. Scill. , chalky : Nux mos. 

, flat : Caps. Iris. v. Nux mos. , fresh, of food : Cocc. 

, long after, of food : Zing. , lost : Puls. 



145 





Taste, metallic : Chil. Cocc. Hep. 

— , putrid : Am. Caps. Graph. Iris v. Merc, v, Nux v. Puls. Rhus. Sep. Yerat. 

, salt : Nux mos. Phos. 

, of food : Sep. Sulph limy : Cham. Zing-. 

»oup : Calc. c. Caps. Cham. Chel. Chin. Cocc. h. Hep. Lye. Nitr. ac. Nux v. Petr. Phoa V cTciL* 

, ,of food : Calc. c. Caps. Lye. , straw-like, of food : Strain. Sulph. , sweet : Cupr. Phos. Sulph. 

, — , of food : Scill. , watery : Caps. 

Teeth, painful : Arg. n. 

, sensitive : Arg. n. Merc. v. , too long, feeling : Merc. v. 

Tongue, burning of: Coloc. 

, catching of, when protruding : Lach. , clean : Dig. Hyos. Phos. 

, coated : Graph. lod. Kali b. , , black : Ars. 

, , brown : Ars. Bry. Kali b. Sulph. , , thick : Kali b. Nux v. Raph. Sec. 

— , , white : Agar. Ant. c. Bry. Chan. Chil. Chin. Coloc. Corn. c. Dig. Gels. Kali nit. Laur, Magn. c. Merc. v. Mez. Nux v. Oleand. Petr Phos. Pod. Raph. Sang. c. Sec. Sep. Verat. 

, , stripes : Bell. 

' ——~~ with clean red soots * Hip. m. 

146 





¦>, yellow: Bry. Cham. Chin. Coloc. Corn. c. Lept. Merc. v. Mez. Nux v. Pod. Rum. Verat. 

, cold : Garb. v. Cupr. Verat. 

— , cracked : Ars. Kali b. Phos. Rhus. Sulph. Verat. 

— , dry : Aloe. Apis. Ars. Bell. Bap. Bry. Cham. Dulc. Hyos. lod. Kali b. Laur. Phos. Pod. Rhus. Sec. Sulph. Verat. 

, heavy : Mur. ac. , moist: Phos. 

— , red : Aloe. Bell. Bry. Coloc. Kali b. Lack. Rhus. Verat. 

, scalded : Coloc. 

thining : Apis. Lach. mooth : Lach. 

, slimy : Chel. Petr. , sore: Dig. 

, swollen : Merc. v. 

, taking impressions of the teeth : Merc. v. 

7. Throat 

Throat, pressure at pit of, as of a foreign body : 

Caust 

8. Appetite. Appetite, canine : Calc. c. lod. Lye. Oleand. Sulph. 

Verat. 

, with headache if not gratified: Lye. , 10 to II A.M.: Sulph. 



147 







Appetite, canine, with weakness if not gratified : Phos , diminished op lost: Amm. m. Apis. Am 

Ars. Bell. Bor. Canth. Chel. Chin. Colch. Cop Dig. Fluor, ac. Gum. g. Iris v. Kali nit. Laur, Lith. c. Magn. c. Nice. Nux v. Oleand. Pod. Puls, 

Bs. Sang. c. Sec. Sil. Stram. Sulph. Tart, c >mb. Verat. 

, good : Aloe. Gale. c. Hep. , hunger without : Nice. 

Aversion to acids : Bell. Cocc. Ferr. ale or beer : Bell. Ferr. Nux v. bread : Hip. m. Lye. Nitr. ac. Nux v. Puls. , brown : Kali c. cheese : Ghel. Oleand. coffee : Fluor, ac. Lye. Nux v. , smell of: Sul. ac. drinks : Canth. Cocc. fat food : Petr. Puls. fish : Graph. food : Bell. Canth. Cocc. Colch. Op. , warm, boiled: Lye. , warm, cooked : Petr. Sil. meat : Aloe. Am. Bell. Ferr. Graph. Hip. m Lye. Mur. ac. Nitr. Ac Petr. Puls. Sep. Sulpk , boiled : Chel. Nitr. ac. milk : Natr. c. Puls. Sep. Tart. c. mother's milk: Sil. salt things : Graph. smoking : Brom. Grat. Lye. 







P spirits : Hip. m. : Caust. Nitr. ac. > : Canth. Cocc. Nux v. Hydroph. Hip. m. 

Desire for acids : Alum. Ant. c. Am. Ars. Bor. Brom. Bry. Chin. Cist. Cen. Cub. Dig. Hep. Kali b. Kali c. Magn. c. Pod. Tart. c. VeraL 

Ilmonds : Cub. pples; Aloe. 

Beer or ale : Aloe. Kali b. Merc, v.' Puls. h. 

bitter things : Dig. 

brandy : Cub. Nux v. Sulph bread : Cub. Grat. 

chalk: Nitr. ac. Nux v, charcoal: Alum. 

cherries : Chin. 

-chocolate: Hydroph. cloves : Alum. 

Pc : Bry. Caps. Carb. v. Con, , ground, burned : Alum. 

¦old food or drink: Ars. Bry. Phos. Rhus. Tart. c. Verat. 

iainties: Ipec. elicacies : Cub. arth : Nitr. ac. 

fat food : Nitr. ac. Nux t). 

fruit : Cbin. Cub. Magn. c. Tart. c. Verat. herring ; Nitr. ac. 



149 





Desire for hot drinks : Chel. indigestible substances : Alum. juicy things : Aloe. Phos. ac. lemonade : Sec. lime : Nitr. ac. , cold : Rhus. nuts : Cub. onions : Cub. oranges : Cub. oysters : Lach. Rhus. piquant things : Fluor, ac. Sang. c. rags, clean : Alum. refreshing, something : Phos. ac. rice, dry: Alum. salt food : Calc. c. Con. seasoned highly, things : Fluor, ac. spirits : Am. Ars. Cup. Puls. starch : Alum. Nitr. ac. sugar : Arg. n. Kali c. sweet things : Calc. c. Ip. Lye. tea : Hep. — grounds : Alum. various things, becoming repugnant when a little is eaten : Rheum. wine : Bry. Calc. c. Chel. Chin. Cub. Hep. Lach. Thirst: Aloe. Ant. c. Bap. Calc. c. Caust. Cham. Chin. Cocc. Golch. Coloc. Corn. c. Dig. Dulc. 

150 





ac. Nux v. Oleand. Phos. Phos. ac. Pod. Rhus. 

B. Sil. Stram. Sulph. Tart. c. Thuj. Verat. 

Thirst, burning : Ars. Canth. Colch. 

, constant : iEth. Ars. Calc. c. Sulph. , drink descending with gurgling : Cupr. Laur. 

Thuj. 

, drinking large quantities : Stram. Verat. 

at long intervals : Bry. 

i 

, small quantities often : Ars. Bell. Chin. , without : Graph. 

, evening : Natr. sul. 

,at night : Ant. c. Calc. c. Rhus, 

— , unquenchable : Aeon. Ars. Camph. Canth. Cast. Colch. Cub. Cupr. Ferr. Grat. Jatr. Raph. Sec. Thuj. Verat. 

, after vomiting : Oleand. 

Thirstlessness : Apis. Arg. n. Camph. Canth. Ferr. Gels. Ip. Lye. INux mos. Pod. Puls. Tart. c. 

9. Eructation. 

Eructations: Am. Garb.v. Diosc. Ip. Iris v. Lye Rum. Zing. 

, bitter: Amm. m. 

, fetid : Am. Psor. Sep. , loud : Arg. n. Garb. v. 

— , sour : Hep. Kali c. Pod. Sep. Sil. Sulph Zing. 

, water : Nice. 

Hiccough : Hyos. Nux v. Tabac. 

151 





152 

GENERAL ACCOMPANIMENTS. 

10. Nausea and Vomiting. 

II : Apis. Arg. n. Bap. Bov\ Brom. Cist :. Colch. Goloc. Con. Cop. Corn. c. Grot. t. , Dig. Diosc. Dulc. Grat. Gum. g. Hep. Jpec. v. Lept. Lye. Nice. Nitr. ac. Nux v. Oleand. Petr. Pod. Raph. Rheum. Bhus. Rum. f. c. Scill. Sec. Sep. Sil. Sulph Tabac Tart. c. it. Zing 

Bith gagging, (retching) : Asar. Crot. t. Pod. 

Cer fresh meat : Caust. rising : Bry. 

on seeing food : Colch. on smelling food : Colch broth : Colch. 

eggs : Colch. 

tfat meat : Colch. fish: Colch. 

when swallowing saliva : Colch 

Bng : Aeon. Ant. c. Ars. Cocc. Coloc. Cop. ic. Elat. Ferr. Gum. g. Hip. m. Ipec. Iris v. Kali b. Lept. Merc. v. Petr. Scill. Sec. Sep. Sulph. Tart. c. Verat. 

, acrid : Ferr. Hep. Iris v. 

Bitter: Ant. c. Apis. Bry. Colch. Grat. Hip. ali b. Sang. c. 

— , bilious : Aeon. Ant. c. Apis. Ars. Coloc. Cupr. Dig. Ipec. Iris v. Jatr. Kali b. Pod. Puls. 



Vomiting, block substances * Ars. llrll. , bloody : Aeon. Ars. Kali b. , brown substances : Ars. , cold, when becoming : Cocc. , cold food or drink, better after : Phos. , drank, of what has been : Aeon. Ant. c. Am. 

Ars. Sil. 

, as soon as it becomes 

f > 

warm : Phos. 

, easy : Golch. Sec. 

laten, of what has been : Ant. c. Ars. Cham, c. Dig. Ferr. Hep. Hip. m. Ipec. Iris v. Kali lls. Raph. Tart. c. Verat. 

, sour: Gale. c. Hep. Kali 

p 

¦leand. Pod. Sulph. uid, glairy: Kali b. 

, pinkish : Kali b. , frothy : Verat. , , milky white : JSth 

¦reenish : Asar. c. Dig. Hell. Hep. Hip. ra. Oleand. Stram. 

, hot: Pod. 

, milk, of curdled : Calc. c. , , mother's : Sil. , , soured : Calc. c. 

¦iucus, of: Aeon. Ant. c. Dig. Dulc. Ipec. b. Oleand. Puls. Sec. 

i , fetid : J.p. 

153 





154 

(j-JiiJN iJjxvALi AUOO Mir A.2i IMENTSi 

Vomiting, mucus, frothy : Pod. Tart. c. , , glassy : Arg. n. Ars. , , green : JEth. Ars. Bry. Ipec. Yerat. , , jelly-like : Ipec. , , slimy : Bor. Cham. , , tenacious: Arg. n. Dulc. , , white : Raph. , , yellowish : Ars. Bry. Colch. Ipec. Verat , riding, when : Cocc. Petr. , scanty : Asar. c. , sour: Asar. c. Bor. Gale. c. Cham. Terr. 

Hep. Irisv. Kali c. Pod. 

— , watery: Cupr. Grat. Hep. Hip. m. Oleand Raph. Sang. c. Sulph. Tabac. 

-, fat lumps, like : Hip. m. , flakes with : Cupr. , greasy : Hip. m. , yellowish : Grat. 

11. Stomach. 

Stomach, acrid feeling in : Hep. , burning in : Ars. Colch. Jatr. Sec. , chilled easily by cold water: Sul. ac. , coldness in : Colch. Grat. , cold stone, feeling of, in : Aeon. , desire to loosen clothing about: Hep. Lack 

Lye. Nux v. 

, distention of: Lye. 

, faintness at: Alum. Brom. Hep 



Oiv-IXX \J XI j x\. X> ±J \J J9L XU il ¦ 

155 

Stomach, gnawing at : Lith. c. Natr. c. , pains in : Ars. Brom. Cist. Cocc. Coloc. 

fn. c. Cupr. Elat. Jatr. lod. Lye. Zing. pressure at: Caust. Elat. Hep. Natr. c. Scill. 

Verat. 

, sick feeling at : Ipec. 

, sinking at : Dig. Hep. Lye. Nux v. k spasm of: Brom. Cocc. Gupr. Jatr. tenderness : Elat. Lye. Ox. ac. 

12. Abdomen. 

tidomen, burning in: Apis. Ars. Canth. Colch Sec. 

, coldness in : Colch. Grat. 

— , colic : Alum. Arg. n. Canth. Chin. Coff. Colch. Coloc. Crot. t. Cub. Cupr. Diosc. Ipec. Kali nit. Lach. Natr. s. Nux v. Ox. ac. Petr. Pod. Puls. Rhus. Sec. 

— , , cutting : Aeon. Cham. Chin. Cina. Coloc. Con. Cub. Dulc. Elat. lod. Lept. Magn. c. Mez. Nitr. ac. Nux v. Rheum. Rhus. Scill. Sulph. 

— , griping: Aloe. Coloc. Con. Corn. c. Nux v. 

— , , pinching : Amm. m. Bor. Chin. Cm Dulc. Ipec. Magn. c. Mez. Nux v. Petr. Rhus Sulph. 

, , tearing : Cham. Rhus. , , twisting : Diosc. 

, cramps in : Cupr 





¦. Bor. Boy. Calc.c. Carb. v. Chin. Coff :h. Con. Corn. c. Crot. Cub. Graph. Hip. m. 

R. Lye. Kali b. Kali c. Lach. Lye. Magn. c. i. Sil. Stram. 

Abdomen, distress in : Lept. 

, fulness in : Aloe. Graph. Lye. Natr. s. X gurgling in : Aloe. Gum. g. Jatr hardness of: Graph. Sil. Stram. 

I heat in : Aloe. Pod. Sil. pressure in : Aloe. 

, retracted : Pod. Yerat. 

— , rumbling in : Aloe. Boy. Coloc. Corn. c. B. g. Jatr. Lye. Magn. c. Nitr. ae. Oleand. . Rhod. Sil.'Zing. 

I sensitive : Aeon. Aloe. Apis. Bell. Canth. Coloc. Crot. t. Cub. Ferr. Natr. s. Nux v. ac. 

, stitches in : Arg. n. , weight in : Ferr. 

tatus : A mm. m. Boy. Carb.v. Chin. Cub. Kali c. Lach. Natr. s. Nice. Nitr. ac. Nux v. Oleand. Sep. Sil. Zing. 

, cold : Con. 

, emission of no : Raph. 

— , fetid : Chin. Cocc. Con. Natr. s. Nice. Oleand. Psor. Rhod. Scill. Sulph. 

, garlic, smelling like : Agar. , hot : Cocc. 

, incarcerated : Lye. Natr. s. Sil. 

, offensive : Aloe. Lith. c. Sang. c. Sep. Sil. 

156 





Flatus, putrid : Garb. v. Oleand. Hypochondrium, pain in right : Bap. Merc. v. Natr. s. , , when coughing : Psor. , , drinking cold water, when : Lept. f f inspiration, during deep : , , laughing, when : Psor. , , lying on it, when : Psor. , , pressure by : Merc. v. Psor. , , walking, when : Psor. Natr. s. , left, when drinking cold water : Natr. c. Hypochondria, sensitive to pressure : Arg. n. Caust. Liver swollen : Chin. Laur. Nux. mos. tender : Dig. Natr. s. Spleen swollen : Chin. lod. Urging to stool, unsuccessful : Corn. c. Natr. s. 13. Anus. Haemorrhoids: Zing. Rectum : protrusion of: Crot. t. 14. Urine. Strangury : Apis. Ganth. Caps. Coloc. Merc. r. Merc, c. Nux v. Tart. c. Tenesmus of bladder : Merc. v. Merc. c. E)n, burning after: Ganth. ifficult : Gale. c. Caps. Nux v. ow interrupted : Con. 



157 





Urination, frequent: Ant c. Apis. Bor. Cs.nth Coloc. Con. Dig. Merc. v. Nux v. Phos. ac. 

, involuntary : Bell. Caust. Hyos. Sep. Sil. , pain in bladder after : Lith. c. 

before : Lith. c. 

» 

P possible only with stool : Alum. seldom : Cupr. 

, urging strong : Lith. c 

Urine bloody : Merc. c. Tart. c. cloudy : Phos. ac. dark : Benz. ac. Chin. Nitr. ac. fetid: Gale. c. Coloc. forming a cloud : Phos. ac. hot : Merc. c. jelly-like: Gin. Coloc. onions, smelling like : Gum. g. pale : Phos. Phos. ac. 

— - profuse: Aeon. Aloe. Ant. c. Apis. Bell Ox. ac. Phos. Phos. ac. Scill. 

retained : Laur. 

— scanty : Cupr. Dig. Here. c. Nux mos. Op Tart. c. 

sour-smelling : Nitr. ac. 

strong-smelling : Benz. ac. Gale. c. Nitr. ac. 

— suppressed: Cupr. Laur. Merc. c. Op. Sec, Stram. Verat. 

watery : Cocc. Phos. Phos. ac. white : Cina. 

158 





Breath, acrid smelling (like horse-radish) : Agar. cold : Garb. v. fetid : Am. Gels. offensive : Nux mos. Chest, constriction of: Cact. Verat. — — , constriction of, spasmodic: Sec, Verat. , oppression of: Verat. Cough, dry: Rum. Heart, constriction of: Gad. , irregular action of: Laur. , oppression of: Tabac. , palpitation of: Caet. Tart. c. Respiration difficult: Elat. feeble : Laur. labored : Apis. moaning : Laur. oppressed : Thuj. Verat. short: Thuja. slow: Laur. rattling : Op. Voice, feeble : See Verat. , hoarse : Sec. Verat. , hollow : Sec. , inaudible: Sec. , lost : Garb. v. Yawning : Cast. 16. Extremities. Arms, cramps of: Cupr. Phos. ac. Verat. 

159 





160 

GENERAL ACCOMPANIMENTS. 

Feet, cold : Lye. Nitr. ac. Hands, blue : Apis. , cold before vomiting : Yerat. , cramps of: Cupr. Phos. ac. Verat. Sec. , hot, after vomiting : Verat. , , palms of: Boy. , panaritium : Natr. sul. , paronychia : Diosc. , sweat on, cold : Kali b. Legs, cramps of: Cupr. Jatr. Pod. Sec. Terat. , pains in : Diosc. Rhus. , weakness of: Aloe. Arg. n. Toes, cramps of: Sec. 17. Sleep. Dreams, tiresome : Bap. Bhus. Sleep, comatose : Op. , with crying out : Bell. Rheum. , disturbed : Apis. Arg. n. Bell. Bap. Bor. Cham. Gin. Merc. v. Petr. Pod. Rheum. Rhus, , with eyes half closed: Ipec. Pod. Sulph. , grinding of teeth: Cm. Pod. , jerking up of limbs : Tart. c. , moaning : Cham. Pod. , rocked, only while : Gin. , with sweat : Chin. Mur. ac. Nitr. ac. Psor. , on forehead, cold : Merc. v. Sil. ¦ , , hot : Cham. startinas ¦ Bell Bor 



Sleep, with waking often : Cm. Petr. Sep. Sulph. , feeling too hot: Phos. , at 3A. M. : Sep. Sleepiness : Ant. c. Bell. Corn. c. Gels. Hip. m. Nux mos. Op. Petr. Tart. c. , daytime : Agar. Kali c. Merc. v. Mur. ac. Nux v. Phos. Pod. Psor. Rhod. Sep. Sulph. Sleepiness, eating, after: Agar. Nux v. Phos. Sleeplessness: Aeon. Bap. Caps. Cm. Goff. Coloc. Hyos. lod. Op. Phos. at night: Merc. v. Mur. ac. with frightful visions : Op. Somnolency: Bell. Nux mos. Op. Phos. ac. Tart. c. Sopor: Bell. Nux mos. Op. 18. Fever. a. Chill. Chill : Camph. Dig. mingled with heat: Dig. Chilliness : Arg. n. Camph. Cast. Dig. Puls. when leaving the fire : Aloe. Coldness : Camph. Jatr. Laur. Tabac. Shuddering : Aeon. Camph. Raph. , internal : Aeon. b. Heat. Heat : Aeon. Bap. Dulc. Kali b. Magn. c. , dry: Aeon. Apis. Ars. Bell. Dulc. , external, with chill : Dig. 14* L 

161 





162 

GENERAL ACCOMPANIMENTS. 

c. Sweat. 

Sweat : Aeon. Benz. ac. Chin. Corn. c. Ferr. with chilliness : Dig. , cold : Camph. Cupr. Jatr. Sec. Tabac. , covered parts, on : Aeon. , exertion, during : Chin. Mere. v. Psor. , night, at: China. Merc. v. Phos. Phos. ac. Psor , profuse: Op. Psor. , sleeping, when : Chin. Mur. ac. Nitr. Ac, Phos. Psor. , sour smelling : Merc. v. , vomiting, with : Aeon. d. Pulse. Pulse, full : Aeon. Bap. , hard : Aeon. iEth. Bell. , imperceptible : Ars. Laur. . , intermitting : Thuja. , every third beat : Mur. ac. , irregular: Laur. Tabac. Thuj. , rapid : Aeon. JEth. Ars. Bell. , slow : Cupr. Laur. Mur. ac. , small : JEth. Bell. Cupr. , soft : Bap. Cupr. , weak : Cupr. Mur. ac. Tabac. 19. Skin. Skin, blue : Sec. Yerat. 



Skin, cool : Nux mos. , dry: Aeon. Apis. Nux m. , hot : Aeon. Apis. , folds, remaining when pinched : Verat. , livid : Bor. Laur. , pale : Bor. , sallow : Pod. , shrivelled : Sec. 20. General Symptoms. Anasarca : Apis. Ascites : Apis. Aversion to being covered, (to heat :) Sec. Chlorosis: Alum. Ferr. Lye. Nux v. Puls. Collapse : Ars. Camph. Garb. v. Laur. Sec. Tabac Cramps: Cocc. Cupr. Jatr. Phos. ac. Pod. Sec. Verat. Cyanosis.* Dig. Debility, (languor :) Alum. Apis. Arg. n. Am. Ars. Benz. ac. Bor. Brom. Bry. Calc. c. Chin. Colch. Con. Corn. c. Dig. Ferr. Graph. Gum. g. Iris v. lod. Kali b. Kali c. Kali nit. Lach. Lept. Lye. Magn. c. Merc. v. Mez. Mur. ac. Nitr. ac. Nuxm. Nux v. Phos. Pod. Psor. Raph. Rum. Sang. c. See. Sep. Tart. c. Thuj. Verat. Emaciation : Apis. Ars. Bor. Calc. c. Ferr. lod. Lye. Nitr. ac. Nux v. Phos. Sil. Tliuj. Exhaustion, (prostration :) Ars. Benz. ac. Camph. Carb. v. Colch. Con. Corn. c. Iris v. Lach. 

163 





164 

GENERAL ACCOMPANIMENTS. 

Exhaustion, absence of: Phos. ac. Fainting : Ars. Cocc. Laur. Nux mos. Op. Tabac Verat. on rising up : Aeon. Bry. Op. Thromb. Faintness: Lept. Raph. Haemorrhages: Cact. g. Jaundice : Ghel. Con. Corn. c. Dig. Merc. v. Pod. Lethargy : Bell. Nux m. Op. Pains appear and disappear suddenly : Bell. Paralysis : Tabac. Restlessness : Aeon. Ars. Bell. Canth. Carb. v. Gupr. lod. Rheum. Rhus. from 4t06 P. M. : Carb. v. Rheumatism : Rhod. Slide down in bed, tendency to : Mur. ac. Softness of the flesh : Pod. Sour smell of body : Rheum. Spasms, (convulsions :) JEth. Bell. Cham. Gupr. Hyos. Ipec. Laur. Op. Tabac. Stretching : Graph. Stupor : Bell. Hyos. Nux m. Op. Subsultus: Hyos. Yawning: Cast. 



165 



CONSULTED IN THE PREPARATION OF THIS WORK. 

Hahnemann. — Chronic Diseases. Jahr. — New Manual. Eepertory, Lippe. — Materia Medica. 

Hale. — Materia Medica. Mure. — Materia Medica. 

Metcalf. — Homoeopathic Provings. Gross. — Comparative Materia Medica. Possart. — Arzneimittellehre. 

Knninghausen. — Repertorium. Keuchhusten. Pocket look. 

Rave. — Pathology and Therapeutics. 

Guernsey. — Obstetrics and Diseases of Females and Children. 

Hartmann. — Specielle Therapie Acuter und Chronischei Krankheiten. — Spec. Therap. Kinderkrankheiten. 

Teste. — Diseases of Children. 

Williamson. — Diseases of Women and Children. Croserio. — Obstetrics. 

Wells. — Diarrhoea. 

Wolf. — Horn. Erfahrungen, Erstes bis fiinftes Heft. Journals. — Am. Horn. Review, Vol. I. to VI. — Hahn. 

Bly, Vol. I. to lII.— British Jour, of Horn., Vol. —U. S. Med. and Surg. Jour., Vol. I. to IV. ly Horn. Review, Vol. VIII.— Am. Jour, of Horn, [cd., Vol. I. to ll.— New England Med. Gazette, 

Vol. I. to IV.— Am. Horn. Observer, Vol. I. to VI. 

Bal Investigator, Vol. 11. to VI. — Ohio Medical urg. Reporter, a few numbers. — Western Horn, rer, a few numbers. — North Am. Jour, of Horn., T. and XIV. — Proceedings of Am. Inst. of Horn.; 

of N. Y. Horn. Med. Soc; of Mass. Horn. Med. Soc; a few volumes. 



166 

INDEX. 

Character and Object of the Work, 5 

Selection op the Remedy, 6 

Adhinistration of the Remedy, . . , . . .11 

PART FIRST. 

Remedies and their Indications, 13 

1. Aconite, . . .13 2. jEthusa cynap., . .14 3. Agaricus, . . .15 4. Aloe, . . . .16 5. Alumina, . . .17 6. Ammon. mur., . . 18 7. Antim. crud., . . .19 8. Apis mcl, . . .20 9. Argent, nit., . . .21 10. Arnica mont., . . 22 11. Arsenicum, . . .23 12. Asarum europ., . .24 13. Belladonna, . . .25 14. Baptisia tinct., . . 26 15. Benzoic acid, . . .27' 16. Borax, . . . .27 17. Bo vista, . . ' . .28 18. Bromine, . . .29 19. Bryonia, . . .29 20. Cactus grand., , . 31 21- Calcarea carb., . 31 

22. Camphor, . . .32 23. Cantharis, . . .33 24. Capsicum, . . .34 25. Carbo veg., . . .35 26. Castoreum, . . .36 27. Causticum, . . .37 28. Chamomilla, . . .37 29. Chelidonium maj., . . 39 30. China, . . . .39 31. Cina, . . . .41 32. Cistus can., . . .41 33. Cocculus, . . .42 34. Coffea, . . . .42 35. Colchicum, . . .43 36. Colocynthis, . . .44 37. Conium, . . . .45 38. Copaivae, . . .46 39. Cornus circin., . . 47 40. Croton tig., . . .48 41. Cubebae, . . .49 4*\ Cuprum met, . . .49 



44. Dioscore'a v., . .51 45. Dulcamara, . . .52 46. Elaterium, . . .53 47. Ferruin met., . . . 53 48. Fluoric acid, . . .54 49. Gelseminum, . . 55 50. Graphites, . . .55 51. Gratiola off., . . 56 52. Gumm. gutt., . . 57 53. Helleborus nig., . . 59 54. Hepar sulph., . . 59 55. Hippoinane man., . 60 56. Hydrophobin, . . 61 57. Hyosciamus, . . 62 58. Ipecacuanha, . . 63 59. Iris persieolor, . . 64 60. Jatropha cure, • . 65 61. lodine, .... 65 62. Kali bich., ... 66 63. Kali carb., . . .67 64. Kali nit, ... 68 65. Lachesis, . . .69 66. Laurocerasus (Hydrocyanic acid), . . .70 67. Leptandria, . . .71 68. Lithium carb., . . 71 69. Lycopodium, . . 72 70. Magnesia carb., . . 74 71. Mercurius sol. (Merc. viv.), . ... 75 72. Mercurius corros., . 76 73. Mezcreum, . . .77 74. Muriatio acid, , . 78 

75. Natrum carb., . . 78 77. Niccolum, . . .80 78. Nitric acid, . . .81 79. Nux mosehata, . . 82 80. Nux vomica, . . 83 81. Oleander, . . .85 82. Opium, . . .85 83. Oxalic acid, . . 86 84. Petroleum, . . .87 85. Phosphorus, . . .88 86. Phosphoric acid, . 90 87. Podophyllum, . . 91 88. Psorinum, . . .92 89. Pulsatilla nig., . . 93 90. Raphanus sat., . . 94 91. Rheum, . . .95 92. Rhododendron, . . 96 93. Rhus tox., ... 96 94. Rumex crisp., . . 98 95. Sanguinaria can., . 99 96. Scilla, . . . 99 97. Sicale corn., . . 100 98. Sepia, . . . .101 99. Silicea, . . .102 100. Stramonium, . . 103 101. Sulphur, . . .104 102. Sulphuric acid, . . 105 103. Tabacum (Nicotine), . 106 104. Tartar emet., . . 106 105. Thrombidium, . . 107 106. Thuja occ, . . .108 107. Veratrum album., . 109 108. Zingiber, . . .111 

167 





168 

INDEX. 

PART SECOND. 

Repertory, 113 Pathological names, 113 Character of the stools, 115 Conditions of the stools and of the accompanying symptoms, 122 a. Aggravations, ....... 122 6. Ameliorations, 129 Accompaniments op the Evacuations, 131 Before stool, 131 During stool, 133 After stool, 136 General Accompaniments, 139 

1. Mind and mood, . • 139 2. Head, . . . .141 3. Eyes, .... 142 4. Nose, . . . .142 5. Face, . , . .142 6. Mouth, . . . .144 7. Throat, . . .147 8. Appetite, . . .147 9. Eructation, . . . 151 10. Nausea and vomiting, . 152 11. Stomach, . . . 154 12. Abdomen, . . . 155 

13. Anus, . . . .157 14. Urine, . . . .157 15. Chest, . . . .159 16. Extremities, . . .159 17. Sleep, . . . .160 18. Fever, . . . .161 a. Chill, . . .161 b. Heat, . . .161 c. Sweat, . . .162 d. Pulse, . . .162 19. Skin, . . . .162 20. General symptoms, . 163 





