 
national library of medicine
NLH  DDlD3nM  A
 ARMY MEDICAL LIBRARY

          WASHINGTON

/"? y'        Pounded 1836
Section.
Number „3.12.3..^t2=^iL
        Form 113o, W. D., S. G. O.
3—10543    (Revised June 13, 1936)
NLM001031948 
/ 
 
 
 
THERAPEUTICS
OF
CHOLERA.
(CHOLERA ASIATIC A.)
                   BY


        P. C. MAJUMDAR, M. D.,

Graduate of Medical College, Calcutta, India, Corresponding
  Member of the American Institute of Homoeopathy, and
     Honorary Member of the International Hahne-
            mannian Association, etc.
 PHILADELPHIA :
BOERICKE & TAFEL.
      1893- 

  Copyrighted by
boericke & tafel.
9
_> 
PREFACE.
  These few pages on the therapeutics
of cholera are offered to the profession
as the fruit  of my continual labors for
fourteen years in  the so-called " home
of cholera."   The disputed and doubt-
ful questions of various theories as to
the etiology of the disease and its path-
ological speculations are purposely left
out  of  consideration.   The  practical
points on prevention of cholera, and
the means of combatting it  when  act-
ual invasion takes place, are dealt with
in full.   The symptomatic indications
are given at the  end of  the book.
  The first portion  of this  book was
read to the World's Homoeopathic Con-
gress, held  at Chicago, in  connection
with  the  World's Columbian  Exposi-
tion, 1893. 
iv            Preface.
  Many valuable hints are taken from
the  works  of Hahnemann,  Hering,
Dunham,   Bell,  Farrington,   H.  C
Allen, L.  Salzer, G.  H.  Clark,  and
others, for which my grateful acknowl-
edgments are due.
                  P. C. Majumdar.
  Philadelphia, Pa., June 12, /Spj. 
THERAPEUTICS OE CHOLERA.
        (CHOLERA ASIATICA.)
  Cholera is a most  dreadful and fatal
disease.  It is characterized  by purg-
ing, vomiting, pains in  the  abdomen,
cramps in  the extremities, coldness of
body, profuse perspiration, loss of pulse,
suppression of urine, great prostration,
feeble  and  hoarse  voice, difficulty of
breathing, and other symptoms of col-
lapse.   Death  generally takes place
very rapidly, but often it takes on a
protracted course.  It is a specific epi-
demic disease, but is endemic in India.
  How powerless is all the Allopathic
treatment to grapple with the disease!
On  the other hand,  the Homoeopathic
system is eminently  successful  in  this
disease. 
6            Therapeutics
  PREVENTIVE HYGIENIC MEASURES.
  As prevention is better than cure,
our sole aim  would be to prevent the
onset of this  dreadful disease,  and to
minimize its ravages. A great deal has
been written on the subject, and numer-
ous methods have  been  adopted  from
time to time.  In  India  the great  ma-
jority of cholera cases take their origin
from defective hygienic  arrangements.
The people of the country take  very
little care with regard to food, exercise,
ventilation, and personal and  general
cleanliness.   Neglect  of  these meas-
ures often is  the cause  of a  cholera
outbreak.  Many  times  the houses are
so built as to cause a  great hindrance
to free ventilation of air.  These ill
built houses are, moreover, overcrowd-
ed with a  large  number of persons.
We are all aware  how  dangerous are
the effects  of such overcrowding.  It is
not  only  the poor  people who  are 
              of Cholera.            7
 obliged  to  lead such a  life, but  even
 rich people also are utterly careless in
 these important subjects.

   Cholera is a  preventable disease to a
 great extent.   Hygienic measures are
 of  great importance as  preventives of
 cholera.   Calcutta,  the  metropolis  of
 India, and  a big town, was  formerly
 visited by epidemics of cholera, but it
 has been surprisingly free from  it for
 the last  three or four years.  It is sim-
 ply owing to the fact  that our  munici-
 pality is taking  particular  care  about
 free drainage, ventilation and pure sup-
 ply of water.
  Purity of food and drink, cleanliness
 of person, free  ventilation of  houses,
 daily exercise  in open  air,  constant
 healthy occupation and avoidance of all
 dread of the disease  will  tend to the
 maintenance of  a degree  of health, en-
abling most persons to resist the possi-
ble  attack of cholera. 
8            Therapeutics
  "Among the precautionary measures
which it behooves each individual to ob-
serve, the following are the most impor-
tant:  As much  as possible  a  regular
mode  of living,  the use of simple and
substantial nourishment,  the slightest
possible deviation from  one's  regular
mode  of living, avoidance of all debili-
tating influences, such  as  excessive
mental  excitement,   depressing emo-
tions, more particularly  avoidance  of
excessive use of spirits."   (Baehr.)
  Persons  must  take care not  to  get
chilled or  overheated, which are very
injurious.  I know persons  who have
an idea that cholera  takes place from
heat, and so  they advise cold  bathing
in the beginning of an attack.   These
cases  are generally fatal.
  All depressing passions and emotions
should  be  carefully  avoided.  Violent
and long-continued exercise is  hurtful.
Fasting and intemperance in eating and 
             of Cholera.            g
drinking are reckoned as the prolific
sources of  cholera outbreaks.  Use  of
vegetable food and abstinence from ani-
mal  food are regarded by  competent
authorities as  the  causes of cholera.
This is a very doubtful question.  Food
should be nourishing, and at the same
time easily digestible. For this  pur-
pose animal food is preferable, but pu-
trid and decomposing fish and meat are
very harmful.
  Every  precaution  is  necessary  to
avoid overloading and oppressing the
stomach  and digestive organs  gener-
ally.   Excessive  quantity of anything
is bad.
  These are  sanitary  preventive meas-
ures; scrupulous attention to these is
likely to be rewarded with perfect  free-
dom from  an invasion of cholera and
other serious diseases of like nature.
  It must  not be concealed  that there
are some outbreaks of cholera the cause
       2 
10           Therapeutics
of which  cannot be traced to the un-
sanitary condition  of the place.   We
have often seen  the sudden outbreaks
of cholera without any seeming refer-
ence  to these unsanitary conditions of
the  place.  These  are, as  it is often
said,  the miasmatic influences or gen-
eral atmosphoric changes.   We cannot
sufficiently be on our guard to prevent
this kind of epidemic  invasion.   But
so much  can be be assured from  per-
sonal experience, that  even this  care-
ful attention to food, drink and cleanli-
ness is sufficient  to prevent the spread
of the disease.

           PROPHYLACTICS.
  I may briefly mention  here the  pro-
phylactic  medicinal treatment of chol-
era.   I  must confess that  my  exper-
ience is very limited in this direction.
Veratrum, Ctiprum and Camphor are
vouched for as the best preventives of
cholera.   Hahnemann  was  the  first 
             of  Cholera.           n
physician  who discovered the prophy-
lactic virtues of these remedial agents.
In his later writings he wrote about the
preventive power of Cuprum in the fol-
lowing words: " The above preparation
of copper, together with good and mod-
erate diet and proper attention to clean-
liness is the  most  certain  preventive
and  protective remedy."  The value of
copper as a preventive is  borne out by
some facts  in  India.  Here the lower
class of people use copper coin next to
their  skin for  this  purpose.   Our
learned  colleague, Dr. Mohendu  Lai
Sirca mentioned  this  fact: "On  the
authority  of a  deputy  inspector of
schools, he cited  an instance where the
head master of a school  in a district
where cholera frequently prevailed, in-
duced a number of  people  to wear  a
pice  (a  copper coin)  through which  a
hole was bored and a thread inserted to
fasten it round the body.   During  five
years, two epidemics  occurred, and  not 
 12           Therapetuics
 one person wearing the pice was affected.
 That the workers of copper mines are
 said to be peculiarly free from the rav-
 ages of cholera is an almost well estab-
 lished fact.  Some urge that a dose of
 Veratrum in the morning and a similar
 dose of Cuprum met. in  the evening are
 sure to protect a person from an attack
 of cholera.   Camphor, internally taken
 or by inhalation is said  to be a prophy-
 lactic against the disease.  The  people
 of  India  have a  very strong faith  in
 Camphor, as they say that Camphor has
 the power of  destroying  the cholera
 miasm.   I  have  given an  extensive
 trial of this  medicine, and  with good
 result.  I myself take an inhalation of
 Camphor solution when visiting cholera
 patients.  Dr. Hering's  powder of sul-
 phur  in the  stocking during cholera
epidemic is said to be a very valuable
preventive.   The burning  of sulphur
and resin  has become a household duty
in every  Indian  house.  The people 
             of  Cholera.           13
have a conviction that  these  agents
have the power of destroying the germs
of many zymotic diseases, and thereby
purifying the atmosphere.
  Whatever may be the intrinsic merit
of these remedial measures as a pro-
phylactic  of cholera, one  fact  must
always  be borne in mind:  that doing
something in the shape of a preventive
during  an  epidemic  of  cholera has  a
great influence on the  minds  of  the
people.  We are all aware  how panic-
stricken has become the public mind in
the face of  a cholera epidemic, and we
often see an actual attack from a mere
dread of the disease.   In these cases
previous administration of a preventive
almost invariably has the desired effect.
       CURATIVE TREATMENT.
  For  convenience in describing  the
medicines in the treatment  of cholera,
it is usual with  authors  to divide  the
disease  into various stages.   It is  not 
    14            Therapeu tics
    exactly that  these stages appear  one
    after the other in regular succession as
    described, but on the contrary we often
    find one stage merging into the other.
    It cannot be expected to see the actual
    disease developed as  described in the
t   books.  All writers on cholera agree in
    recognizing the following stages of the
    disease.  First, the premonitory stage ;
    second, stage  of evacuation or  full de-
    velopment;  third, collapse stage, and,
    fourth, the stage of reaction.  We shall
    describe the treatment in this order, re-
   viewing the complications and sequelse
   of the  disease at the end.

     The number of remedies in true chol-
   era is not very great.  Hahnemann first
   suggested Camphor,  Veratrum alb. and
    Cuprum, and this suggestion is  so sim-
   ply  recorded  that there is no difficulty
   in treating the disease.

     In the  first stage, it is difficult  to
   recognize  the true nature of the dis- 
             of  Cholera.           15
ease, so people pay very little attention
to it;  the physician is not  generally
called  at  this stage.  But  if there are
malaise, great prostration, pains in var-
ious parts of the body, and other un-
easy sensations, a few doses of Aconite
will remove them   If there are digest-
ive derangements—loathing of food, no
appetite, thin,  diarrhoeic stools,  Nux
vomica, Pulsatilla and  Veratrum may
be useful.  In  premonitory diarrhoea I
generally use either Camphor or  Vera-
trum after each stool, and  that is gen-
erally sufficient to prevent the further
development of the disease.
  In the  stage  of purging and vomit-
ing, or, in other words, when the evac-
uations fully set in, the following med-
icines are to be considered : 
Veratrum alb. <
 16           Therapeu tics
                 Camphor.
                 Cuprum met. or acet.
                 Ricinis.
                 Jat7'opha.
                 Euphorbia.
                 Croton tig.
                 Antimonium tart.
                 Elaterium.
   Veratrum may be considered as the
 type of a class of  remedies which are
 more or less potent in checking an un-
 due evacuation  and  bringing  it  into
 natural color and consistency.   In fact,
 by the administration of one of  these
 remedies  according to indications, the
 further mischief may be averted.
   Veratrum album.—As students of the
 old school, we are very familiar with the
 fact that  Veratrum is a drastic purga-
 tive, so, according to the Homoeopathic
 law of cure, it must be a  medicine par
excellence  for choleraic evacuations —
both purging and vomiting.  From our
repeated experience, we can give Vera- 
              of Cholera.           17
 trum the highest place in the developed
 stage of  cholera.  The late lamented
 Professor Farrington  says: "Veratrum
 seems to act prominently on the abdom-
 inal organs, acting probably  through
 the  splanchnic nerves.  When these
 nerves are paralyzed, the blood vessels
 become overcharged  with  blood,  and
 pour forth  their serum.  The prostra-
 tion, the coldness, the terrible sinking
 sensation that belong to Veratrum, all
 start from these nerves."

  Indications for administering Vera-
 trum : Vomiting and purging of a large
 quantity of serous fluid—"rice water"
 evacuations as they are called ; colicky
 pains through the abdomen; cramps in
 the extremities, especially in the calves
 of the legs;  great prostration; cold
 sweat, especially on the forehead ; cold-
 ness  and  blueness of  the face and
hands ; great thirst for large quantities
of cold water and acid drinks.
3 
18           Therapeu tics
  In  times  of cholera outbreaks it is
wise to give Veratrum at  the  first ap-
pearance of diarrhoea, so that no further
and  serious  development  would  take
place.   In such  cases  Veratrum  has
marvelous effects.   We  have  many a
times  saved numbers of cases by the
timely administration of this remedy. It
is true that in Veratrum poisoning, the
stools are not always choleric in nature;
they  are distinctly  bilious, greenish,
watery, with flakes, and there  may not
be total suppression of urine, but what-
ever may be the toxicological  effect of
 Veratrum about the evacuations, our
clinical experience is very wide as re-
gards  the curative  results concerned.
So  we can  confidently advise its use
in all kinds of stools and vomiting.
  In   cholera,  general   depression  of
strength is  very great, and here Vera-
trum  is also our sheet anchor.  Hahne-
mann  gives the following symptoms of
poisoning in his  "Lesser  Writings:" 
             of Cholera.           19
"Two  children took  White  Hellebore
by mistake.   A few minutes after tak-
ing the drug they became quite cold,
fell down, their  eyes projecting  like
those of  a person in a state of  suffoca-
tion; the saliva  ran continually from
their mouths, and they seemed devoid
of consciousness.  I saw them  half an
hour after the accident, and when I ar-
rived both seemed at the point of death;
distorted, projecting  eyes; disfigured,
cold countenance; relaxed  muscles;
closed jaws; imperceptible respiration."

  As  regards dose, I generally com-
mence  with the i2x and subsequently
to 30X.   Veratrum 3d or 6th centesimal
trituration is sometimes useful.
  Our next great anti-choleraic remedy
is Camphor.   It is used in the prelimi-
nary diarrhoeic stage, as well as in the
collapse  stage.  When the system  is
overwhelmed with the cholera  poison
Camphor should  be thought of. The 
20           Therapeutics
body is icy cold, voice husky and pros-
tration is intense.   As soon as the pa-
tient  is  passing diarrhoeic stools no
time should  be lost  in  administering
the remedy.   In this stage, if we give
from one to five drops of Camphor after
each stool we are almost sure of check-
ing the further progress of the disease.
Hahnemann  says:  "In  the first stage
Camphor gives rapid  relief, but the pa-
tient's friends must themselves employ
it, as this  stage soon ends  either in
death or in the second stage which is
more difficult to be cured, and not with
Camphor.  In  the  first  stage, accord-
ingly, the patient must get as often as
possible  (at  least every five minutes)
a drop of Spirit of Camphor  (made
with one ounce of Camphor to  twelve
of alcohol) on a lump of sugar or in a
spoonful of water.
  "The quicker all this is done at  the
first onset of the first stage of the dis-
ease, the  more rapidly  and certainly 
             of  Cholera.           21
 will the patient recover, often in a cou-
 ple  of  hours;  warmth, strength, con-
 sciousness, rest and sleep return, and
 he is saved."
   What Hahnemann said above has all
 been very well proved in our own prac-
 tice  in  India.   In my  younger days,
 when I was called in  the very begin-
 ning of a cholera attack, I was almost
 invariably   successful   with   Camphor
 alone, but later  on I have scarcely a
 case of  cholera where I got the oppor-
 tunity  of  administering  Camphor, as
 the stage is advanced and Camphor has
 no place.
   Cuprum.—It is really a very effica-
 cious remedy in the developed stage of
 cholera.  It generally checks purging
 and vomiting, and is pre-eminently use-
 ful in cutting short the  distressing and
painful  cramps in the extremities and
other parts of the body.  Hahnemann
placed great confidence in this remedy. 
2 2           Therapeu tics
He sometimes advised us to give it in
alternation with  Veratrum.  Our late
lamented Dr. Bhaduri, who had treated
more cases of cholera than anybody in
Calcutta, used to say that he could treat
almost all his cases with Cuprum alone.
He was very fond of Cuprum arseii. in
the stage  of collapse  with  purging,
vomiting and cramps.  Drs.  Drysdale
and Russel,  of  England,  speak very
highly of Cuprum, as does Mr. Proctor
also.  This latter  gentleman  treated
ninety-eight  fully developed  cases of
cholera with this drug, and was satis-
fied  with  it.  He writes: "For  the
cramps it was unquestionably the best
remedy, and I may say for vomiting
also.  In the stage of collapse I grad-
ually found myself trusting to Cuprum,
and  the impression  is very  strong in
my mind that in  collapse it is the most
reliable of our remedies."
   Indications for  Cuprum: Purging and
vomiting of rice-water fluid;  colic of  a 
             of Cholera.           23
paroxysmal nature; constant  restless-
ness; cramps in the extremities, begin-
ning in fingers and toes; great exhaus-
tion;  spasms in calves and abdomen;
icy coldness of the  hands and  feet;
quick, rattling  and  short breathing;
almost imperceptible, weak and thready
pulse; pale and sunken features; great
thirst—the water  runs  down  with a
gurgling noise; relief of vomiting, after
drinking; urine scanty or entirely sup-
pressed.
  I  prefer the higher dilutions, com-
mencing with the i2x and going higher.
I have seen a distinct  aggravation from
the 3d and 6th.   Cupruvi ars. is very
useful in cholera.   Dr. E. M. Hale first
drew our  attention to its use  in cases
of cholera.  He says: "I first used it
in some severe cases of cholera in the
year 1867 and 1876.  These cases were
marked by  the usual intestinal disor-
ders, to which  were added severe  and
painful cramps in  the abdomen and ex- 
 24           Therapeutics
 tremities.   The  alternation of Arsenic
 and Cuprum  did not prove as satisfac-
 tory as I expected, but the use of  Cu-
 prum ars. in  the 6th trituration, in  wa-
 ter for children and dry on the tongue
 in adults, generally acted promptly.  I
 can recommend it in cholera infantum,
 spasmodic and neuralgic pains in  the
 bowels, accompanied by screams and
 cramps in the fingers and toes, attended
 with great debility and threatened  col-
 lapse.  I have used it in several cases,
 and can bear testimony of its value in
 cases  indicated.  Allied  to  Veratrum
 and Camphor are  a number  of  medi-
 icines more or less applicable to check
 choleraic evacuations,  and these  are
 Ricinus, Jatropha, Euphorbium, Croton
 tig.,  Elaterium and  Antimon.  tart.
 Among these we had very satisfactory
.results from Ricinus in the epidemic of
 1883.
   Ricinus is used in cases of diarrhoeic
 cholera.   I mean cases which assume 
             of  Cholera.          25
 the nature of true cholera from indiges-
 tion or simple diarrhoea.  We had num-
 bers  of  cases  reported in the Indian
 Homoeopathic Review of that year.  In
 a large family in Calcutta, there was an
 outbreak of cholera, and three persons
 died of it, notwithstanding Homoeopa-
 thic treatment was resorted to from the
 beginning.   I was called when a fourth
 case appeared, and at once gave Ricinus,
 which had marvelous effect in restoring
 the patient to health.  There were four
 more cases in this family,  and they
 were all saved by the timely adminis-
 tration of this medicine.  In this house
 I met a  medical  student who watched
 all  the cases and was struck by the
 prompt action of my medicine. He was
 curious to know the name of  the medi-
 cine.   I  told him it was Ricinus.   He
 said Veratrum and Camphor and other
 medicines were given by the  previous
physicians to no effect.   This  time
Ricinus was so efficacious, and that stu-
      4 
26           Therapeutics
dent (studying in the old school) gave
the authority of Dr. George Johnson as
the promulgator of Castor oil treatment
in cholera.  Indications:  Purging and
vomiting of rice-water fluid; cramps in
the extremities;  there is  seldom or no
pains  in the abdomen;  extreme pros-
tration ;  complete suppression of urine;
scarcely perceptible pulse; very  slight
coldness of the extremities.

   In  Ricinus  cases  there is  gradual
 sinking of the vital  power:  in this re-
 spect it  differs both from Camphor and
 Veratrum which have  rapid  sinking.
 The stools may be  sometimes tinged
 with bile, or a little slimy and  mixed
 with mucus and blood.

   I generally use the 6th decimal dilu-
 tion after each stool.

   Jatropha cur. produces depression of
 heart.   Vomiting  is  more  prominent
 than purging.  Indications are whitish 
             of  Cholera.           27
vomiting,  like  white  of  egg;  stools
watery and  in  gushes, gurgling  and
rumbling  in  the bowels,  cramps  in
calves, pains and burning in stomach.
There is coldness with slight perspira-
tion and thready pulse.  " Watery diar-
rhoea as it spurted from  him."  The
alarming symptoms of cholera are not
marked in  this remedy, and the patient
is devoid of any anxiety for his future.
In fact he cares nothing for his disease
and is cheerful.
  Euphorbia is another remedy closely
analogous  in its  action  to Jatropha.
Both these remedies, in fact, are medi-
cines for choleraic diarrhoea rather than
true  Asiatic cholera.   There is  very
little difference in their action.  I use
the  6th  decimal  dilution,  a dose  re-
peated after each evacuation.
  Croton tig.—Though it is not a medi-
cine for true cholera, it often cuts short
the disease by its early administration, 
28           Therapeutics
otherwise it  would  be developed into
a terrible disease;  stools  are yellow,
watery, passed forcibly like shot; worse
after food  and drink; deadly nausea;
vomiting after drinking and great pros-
tration.  Sixth decimal or 30th centesi-
mal may be used.
  Antimonium tart.—It is very closely
related Veratrum alb., and I often use it
when that  remedy fails to act.
  Indications:  Very much  like Vera-
trum.  Purging  of   rice-water  stool;
vomiting with  great effort; cold, clam-
my perspiration; drowsiness with com-
plete exhaustion; almost imperceptible
pulse; heart's  action failing; labored
and difficult respiration; and complete
collapse.   When  cholera  breaks  out
during an  epidemic  of smallpox, it  is
better  to make a choice of Antim. tart.
in the very onset of the disease.   We
have several times witnessed the charm-
ing effect of the remedy in  such cases. 
              of Cholera.           29
   Iris versicolor is  very efficacious in
 checking cholera evacuations, but it is
 a remedy for what  is called  English
 cholera.   I used it in cases where vom-
 iting is  a prominent and distressing
 symptom.  Acidity, with burning sen-
 sation in the whole  alimentary  canal
 and bilious vomiting.  In the case of a
 young gentleman in a suburban  town
 of  Calcutta, I  got  a charming  effect
 from Iris.  The attending  physician
 tried all  medicines  to check purging
 and vomiting, without any effect.  Iris
 versicolor was given by me, and the pa-
 tient was all right within a couple of
 hours.  He had been suffering for two
 days before my arrival.  These are the
 principal  remedies in the  developed
 stage of  cholera.  They are more  or
 less potent in checking cholera evacua-
 tions.

  But if the evacuations are not stop-
ped, or stopped after doing considerable 
30           Therapeutics
damage to the system, the case goes on
to the  next stage — the collapse.  In
this stage the patient is on the point of
death;  in fact,  all the signs of death
are visible on him.  We must not lose
heart on  seeing these serious  symp-
toms, as we can still  do a good deal of
good  to save the patient.  The follow-
ing remedies are  to  be thought  of in
the collapse stage:
Aconite.
Camphor.
Veratrum alb.
Carbo vegetabilis.
Cuprum arsen.
Hydrocianic acid.
Cobra.
Secale cor.
Antim. tart.
Arsenicum album.
  Practically a great deal of difficulty
would arise in  treating  this  stage of
cholera.   We  have  so many remedies
closely analogous to each other, that it
seems almost  impossible to select one. 
              of  Cholera.           31
If we take pains to record the symp-
toms very minutely, our difficulty would
be much minimized and we may  come
to a definite and reliable selection.
  Arsenicum album, is a very important
medicine in the collapse stage of chol-
era.   Its pathogenetic symptoms are so
closely similar to Asiatic  cholera that
an arsenical poisoning case may be eas-
ily mistaken for a cholera case.   It has
a vast range of action,  and we have re-
peatedly verified its curative power in
most serious cases of the disease.  It is
for this reason that I select it as a pro-
totype of collapse remedies.  Its symp-
toms are very marked and unmistaka-
ble.
  Great irritability associated with pro-
found  exhaustion is   the  prominent
characteristic of Arsenic  cases.  You
will  see patients whose pulse vanishes,
great weakness, even unable to utter a
single word, yet restless,  anxious and
irritable. 
32           Therapeutics
  Indications  for Arsenic. Great  anx-
iety  and restlessness;  fear of  death;
great prostration of strength; sunken
eyes, distorted face, pointed nose;  cold
and  clammy perspiration; burning  of
the whole body; retching and  vomit-
ing; unquenchable thirst, drinking fre-
quently but small quantities at a time,
and vomiting  immediately after drink-
ing; violent burning of  stomach and
abdomen; urine completely suppressed,
thin, watery stools.
  When a  patient gets  an  attack  of
cholera after eating too  much  fruit and
drinking iced water, living in a damp
place,  exposed to the influence of pu-
trefactive and offensive  smells, Arsenic
is the remedy.
  I often use  the 30th dilution  in fre-
quently repeated doses  until  favorable
symptoms are observed.   I have many
a time  saved  very desperate cases  of
cholera by giving frequent doses of the
200th dilution when the 30th  failed, 
             of Cholera.           33
   Arsenic has been frequently adminis-
 tered  indiscriminately,  without refer-
 ence  to its  symptomatic indications.
 This  is indeed  a bad practice.  It is,
 therefore, as Dr. Bell says, that Arsenic
 does more harm than good in the hands
 of ignorant persons.
   Camphor has  been used in  the stage
 of collapse, but I have not found it very
 efficacious; so generally doubt resort to
 it in collapse. Indications: sudden and
 rapid prostration; coldness of surface;
 cold sweat; bluish countenance; husky
 voice;  violent cramps and loss of con-
 sciousness.   It  should  be cautiously
 given, and as soon as signs of improve-
 ment begin, or warmth returns, it must
 be stopped.
  Aconite is pre-eminently  the  best
 remedy in the collapse stage of cholera.
 Dr. Richard  Hughes says that in  time
Aconite will be a valuable medicine in
cholera.  Dr. Hempel is the first physi-
       5 
34           Therapeutics
cian who draws our attention to its use
in cholera.   Dr.  Hughes  wrote this
long ago, and I believe the time is now
come, and have used Aconite very ex-
tensively and with good results.

  Indications:  Great anxiety and fear
of death;  great coldness  of the whole
body;  cold perspiration;  great thirst;
restlessness; labored breathing,  with
pains  and oppression of chest; hardly
perceptible, or thready and quick pulse;
weak and  slow beating of the heart.
In cases of violent colicky pains in ab-
domen, it is one of our  greatest helps.
An elderly lady had an attack of chol-
era, collapse, restlessness and unbeara-
ble  pains  in  the  epigastric  region.
Many  Homoeopathic  remedies  were
tried  without effect.   I  found her in
great agony, gave her Aconite ix every
half hour, and  in two doses she was re-
lieved of her pains and  reaction took
place.   In warm days with cool nights, 
             of Cholera.           35
and after exposure, I  find Aconite very
efficacious.
  Carbo vegetabilis is one of our most
reliable remedies in collapse of cholera.
I employed it in very many cases where
death seemed inevitable, and with good
results.  When the reactive power of
the system is gone, Carbo veg. is indi-
cated.   Indications: The patient lies as
if dead;  no signs  of irritability about
him; pulseless; cold and clammy sweat;
leaden hue of the body;  husky voice;
difficult and  labored  respiration;  no
thirst; no purging and vomiting;  ab-
domen  often distended;  difficulty of
breathing and suppressed urine.  Lower
dilutions are of no use; 30th and up-
wards are to be employed.

  Hydrocyanic acid.—It is a marvelous
remedy,  acting promptly, and some-
times snatching away the  patient from
the verge of death.  On one occasion I
had to attend a  little girl.  When I ar- 
36           Therapeutics
rived I saw her gasping her last breath.
She could not swallow medicine or any-
thing else.   I poured a few  drops  of
Hydrocyanic  acid on a clean handker-
chief and put it in her nostril, and  to
my utter surprise I found her breathing
quietly in a few minutes; and she made
a perfect recovery. It is for this reason
that our esteemed colleague,  Dr. Mo-
hendra Lai Sircar, speaks of it as fol-
lows: "If any remedy is entitled to be
spoken of as  a charm, it is  Hydrocyanic
acid.   It would seem at times to restore
animation  to a  corpse."   Indications:
Icy coldness of the body with pulseless-
ness; breathing slow,  deep and  some-
what spasmodic  in character, beating of
the  heart  slow  and weak; urine and
stools generally suppressed.
  Third or sixth decimal  dilutions are
generally used more frequently almost
every half hour or so.  It should be
freshly prepared.  Cyanides are  often
useful  in triturition. 
             of  Cholera.           37
   Cobra or Naja trip.—This is a medi-
cine from the poison of a most venom-
ous snake of India.  The effect of this
poison  is  very swift   to  our people.
Compare it to a sudden attack of Asia-
tic cholera.  Dr. Salzer, in his excellent
book on cholera, speaks of it and other
snake poisons in the following words:
" We administer them when respiration
quickens, becoming at the same time
more and  more superficial, while the
heart's action is normal and still com-
paratively vigorous.  This sort of res-
piration  is a  sure  sign of impending
paralysis of the respiratory centre, and
coincides in  so  far  exactly with what
occurs under the venomous influence of
snake poison."   Higher dilutions are
better.
  Secale cornutum.—-It  is another very
important medicine in the collapse stage
of cholera.  Indications: Watery, slimy
and offensive stools; vomiting of water;
eyes sunken;  violent  cramps of the 
2 8           Therapeutics
calves, the hands and the chest; great
restlessness;  constant thirst; difficulty
of breathing; pulselessness, or small,
slow and almost imperceptible pulse;
coldness of the body, but patient  feels
heat inside, and cannot keep clothes on
body.   I  have very  little confidence in
Secale in  collapse, but it is a very val-
uable remedy in some other conditions
in cholera.   It  often removes distress-
ing cramps when Cuprum fails.  I fre-
quently find it  efficacious in removing
that dreadful symptom, the cramps and
 pains in  the side of the chest, more so
 in  heart.  Appearance  of  menstrual
 flow during an attack of cholera is very
 serious, and  in such cases Secale proves
 of immense  value.  Typhoid condition
 in  cholera is also  a very  dangerous
 complication, and  here  Secale is our
 great  help.
   Febrile heat after coldness; sleepi-
 ness  with now and then restless and 
of Cholera.           39
often profound comatose sleep;  pinched
appearance;  frequent and small pulse.
It may be useful in gangrene and bed-
sore,  ulceration  of cornea and some
other symptoms, derived from  the low
vitality of the system after an attack
of cholera.   Dilutions from 6th to 30th
best.
   Veratrum  alb. is also a  very useful
remedy in collapse.   Dr. Salzer writes
as follows: "I  can hardly  believe that
Veratrum should  not be as useful  in
collapse owing to the paralytic condi-
tion of the heart.   Perhaps we give the
remedy at too long intervals.  Dr. Car-
rol Dunham recommends it to be given
like  Camphor, every  five minutes.
Much of this disrepute of  the drug  in
collapse may also be owing to its not
having always been administered at the
right place and according to right indi-
cations.
  Antimon.  tart,  being a  depressant 
40           Therapeutics
medicine on the heart, is recommended
in the collapse stage of  cholera, and
we often find it useful.  My indications
are generally the same as Veratrum.  I
find it very  useful  in  cholera  with
drowsiness and complete exhaustion.
   Another medicine of collapse is Nico-
tine, the active principle of tobacco.  It
may be used in collapse with cold sweat,
deadly nausea, sleepiness and weakness
of heart's action.  It is sometimes ap-
plicable  in typhoid  symptoms  with
vomiting and drowsiness.  I have had
 very little experience with this remedy.
    COMPLICATIONS AND  SEQUEL^.
   Our troubles do not end with the
 successful  treatment of  the  collapse
 stage; various other ailments await our
 poor  patient, and  we must  be on our
 guard to combat them in proper  time.
 These must be considered as serious as
 a developed or collapsed stage of the
disease.  Many  of our patients  often 
              of Cholera.           41
 succumb after reaction from these com-
 plications, etc.
   Urcsmia.—If urine is not voided after
 reaction fully sets in, we must do some-
 thing for it.   Some physicians are in a
 great hurry about  establishing a urin-
 ary  secretion;  they  become so impa-
 tient that  they want  it  even in a col-
 lapsed state.  When  reaction is in  its
 progress, we must stop all  medicines
 and  wait.  If still  urine is not  passed,
 and  there is fear of a typhoid state su-
 pervening, then we stir up and do some-
 thing.   Many  a time our previously
 employed  remedies  are  sufficient  to
 restore  urinary secretion; so,  without
 abandoning them for  new remedies, we
 must continue them  according to the
 symptomatic manifestation of the case.
 Arsenic, Hydrocyanic acid and Tabacum
 or Nicotine, have to be prescribed.

  But if they fail,  and if there is im-
pending congestion of the brain and  its
      6 
42           Therapeutics
symptoms, we must resort  to Bella-
donna.  I generally find it  useful  in
the 30th dilution.  Hyosciamus 30th or
sometimes 200th is  often very benefi-
cial with the nervous and other typhoid
symptoms.   Opium  is one of our best
remedies if there is comatose condition
along with uraemia.
   We have  seen Agaricus  muscarius
and Muscarin valuable in  the typhoid
condition from uraemia associated with
pulselessness or small, thready pulse,
coldness of the  surface and muttering
delirium.  Muscarin may be tried in
the early stage of cholera in  purging
and vomiting.
   If urine is collected in the bladder
and there is  sufficient  expulsive power,
and patients exert their utmost but
void  no urine,  I use  Cantharis 6x or
30th.   Failing  with this remedy, and
if there be some burning in the ureth-
ral canal and no urging, Terebinthina 
             of Cholera.           43
may  be  administered.   Our  much-
vaunted  Kali bich. produced no effect
in my hands.   I  am  in  the habit  of
using Carbolic acid in  cases of uraemic
intoxication  and  delirium  in  cholera
cases with the following symptoms:
constantly agitated, with a piercing cry,
delirious starting  from sleep;  tongue
dry,  coated with thick yellow fur; great
thirst and  a  high  fever; urine may be
dark, black or olive green in color.   It
is sometimes suppressed.

  In the  reaction stage we sometimes
meet with feverishness, and when it is
slight we must not give any medicine;
it generally goes off itself.   When it is
assuming a grave aspect, we may try
Aconite and Veratrum, all according to
indications.  Belladonna has the power
of checking  it  when  above remedies
fail.  Rhus tox. and  Bryonia  may be
indicated.  Phosphoric acid is one of our
best  remedies in  mild forms of fever 
44           Therapeutics
from  weakness  of  the system.   This
later remedy is also useful when react-
ionary fever assumes a typhoid charac-
ter.
  Hiccough  is often a very distressing
symptom.  Our ordinary hiccough rem-
edies are not very efficacious in this
state.  Cuprum met. and Cuprum arsen.
are my great helps.  Veratrum, Nicotine
and Hydrocyanic acid are  also recom-
mended.  If there  is some  faulty con-
dition of the digestive system we may
think of Nux vomica,  Cicuta v., Phos-
 phorus and Ignatia.   Belladonna may
be useful.  Ice water sometimes has a
 very prompt action  in checking  hic-
 cough.
   We  have sometimes seen patients,
 cured to all intents and purposes, die
 suddenly of dyspnoea.  Dr. Macnamara
 is of opinion that  in  these cases there
 is formation of a clot in the right side
 of the heart,  usually extending  into 
              of Cholera.           45
 the pulmonary arteries.  Dr. Salzer, on
 the authority of Dr. Buchner, advised
 us to give Calcarea arsen. 6th or  12th
 in such cases.  But death is so sudden
 in these cases that nothing can be done.

   After the cholera symptoms are over
 we often  get some cases of obstinate
 diarrhoea as the after effect of the dis-
 ease.  In these  cases where the stools
 are yellow, watery, quite copious and
 sudden,  Croton  gives  prompt  relief;
 when there is colic with saffron-yellow,
 watery stools and  much  prostration,
 Colchicum; when stools are yellowish
 or white,  painless,  Phosphoric  acid or
 Podophyllum; in tympanitic distention,
 with  passage of flatus, stools  yellow,
 Natrum  sulph.;  in  retarded convales-
 cence, with diarrhoea of undigested food,
 China.  A dose or two of Sulphur high
is  needed  to complete the cure.  When
there is a  tendency towards  dysentery,
stools greenish, with colic,  Merc,  sol., 
46           Therapeutics
but if bloody and slimy, Merc. cor. may
be employed.
  Vomiting often becomes troublesome
and persistent, and defies all our well-
selected remedies.  In such cases some
bland and mucilaginous diet is all that
is necessary to check it.   I generally
give  rice water, arrowroot  or barley
water, with a little salt, and acidulated.
Other complications should be treated
as general diseases.
   Ulceration of  the  cornea  requires
 China, Mercurius, Secale and Argentum
 nitricum.
   Diet.—There  is a good deal  of dis-
 cussion  among the physicians on this
 subject.   From  brandy, stimulants,
 broth, milk and others, to no diet, have
 been prescribed by medical men.  From
 practical observations in many cases we
 are of opinion that during the progres-
 sive and collapse  stages of the disease
 no food should  be given  except ice 
             of Cholera.           47
and  plenty of cold water  to  appease
thirst and cool down  stomach.  After
the tempest is over we can give a little
barley or arrowroot water. When after
a time  craving for  food occurs, and a
gradual addition of nutritious but easily
digestible food may be tried. The stom-
ach becomes very sensitive after an at-
tack of cholera,  so  particular  care  is
necessary  in  selecting  food.   I  have
seen fatal cases of relapse from impro-
per food. 
THERAPEUTICS OE  CHOLERA.
        ACONITUM  NAPELLUS.
   Aconite is a great anti-cholera medi-
cine, but it should be used with proper
indications.   Dr. C. J. Hempel is the
first physician who strongly advised us
to use this remedy in cases of cholera.

   Characteristics.—Aconite is  most fre-
quently indicated in most recent cases
of illness  occurring in young persons,
especially in girls  of a full,  plethoric
habit, and who  lead a sedentary life;
persons' who are easily and readily af-
fected by sudden atmospheric changes.

  On rising from a recumbent position
the red face becomes deathly pale, or
he becomes faint or giddy  and inclined
to fall over;  in consequence he fears to
rise again.   These symptoms  are often 
             of Cholera.           49
accompanied by vanishing of sight and
unconsciousness.
  Great  fear and  anxiety  with conse-
quent nervous excitability; afraid to go
out, to cross the street or to  go into a
crowd where there is any excitement or
many people.   The countenance is ex-
pressive  of constant  fear; life is  ren-
dered miserable by it.  For the effects
of mental shock.  Increased sensibility;
the whole body is sensitive to touch.
Many of the symptoms are accompan-
ied by shivering.
  Hahnemann said:  "Aconite should
not be given in any case which does not
present a similar group of symptoms."
These  are the  symptoms of the mind
and disposition, viz: Restlessness, anx-
iety and  uneasiness of mind and body,
causing  tossing and  sighing and fre-
quent changes of  posture;  foreboding
anticipations  of evil, anguish of mind,
dread of  death, and even distinct antic-
      7
iWGTON. D-C^i-^ 
50           Therapeutics
ipation of its occurrence.   (Dunham.)
  In  cholera these mental symptoms
are of very  frequent  occurrence, and
Aconite, therefore, is one  of our great-
est helps.
  It happens* that Aconite is frequently
indicated at the very beginning of some
acute affections,  and  that if  properly
used  in  such cases it will  often  cut
short the career of the disease.  From
these facts  has arisen a fashion of giv-
ing Aconite almost as a routine  pre-
scription in the oeginning of all acute
cases  indiscriminately, particularly if
the cases are supposed to be character-
ized by that protean phantom of the pa-
thologists—inflammation.  Great mis-
chief often results from  this  practice
negatively, inasmuch  as  it causes the
loss of valuable time during which the
true specific remedy which should have
been given at the very first might have
been  acting; and positively, inasmuch
as the Aconite often, when improperly 
             of Cholera.           51
administered,  does real mischief,  ex-
hausting the nervous power of the pa-
tient, and adding  to the nervous pros-
tration  which  is  already  probably a
great source of danger.  Aconite should
never be given to save time.   It were
better to give nothing, because Aconite,
if given in  a case which does not call
for it, might do mischief.
   Aggravation.—In the evening; night,
especially after midnight;  in a warm
room; from taking cold; drinking cold
water; from  tobacco smoke; lying on
either side;  on coming from  the open
air into a warm room.
   Amelioration.—In open air; while at
rest (except at night in bed);  from per-
spiration;  from  urine; lying on the
back.
   Cause.—When  disease takes  place
from dry, cold west or northwest winds;
during  hot days  with cool nights in
summer; made worse by getting wet, 
5 2           Therapeutics
especially  getting  the feet  wet; from
suppressed  perspiration by uncovering
or sitting in a draught; rheumatic ex-
posure of  any kind;  by fright; after
eating fruit.
  Stools.—Watery; green or black; dys-
enteric, bloody and slimy; frequent but
small; involuntary; pains in abdomen.
  Sleeplessness; frequent dry heat; full,
hard, very quick pulse.
  In  cholera, hippocratic countenance;
face  bluish; lips black; expression of
terror; cold limbs with blue nails; col-
lapse.  (Bell.)
      ANTIMONIUM TARTARICUM.
  It is a very useful remedy in cases of
cholera in its first, and in the last stage.
It  is  a close analogue of Veratrum al-
bum and Arsenicum in the treatment of
cholera.
  Characteristics. — Great  prostration ;
cold sweat;  thready pulse; continuous 
of Cholera.          53
nausea; straining to vomit, zuithperspi-
ration on the forehead.  Great irritabil-
ity.   Vomiting  of  greenish,  watery,
frothy mucus or food.  Vomiting is ac-
companied by  trembling of hands  and
fainting, and is followed by great lan-
guor, drowsiness, loathing, desire  for
cooling things; pale, sunken face; dim
and swimming eyes.
  Violent and painful urging to urin-
ate, with scanty and bloody urine.
  Drowsiness or  somnolency.
  Palpitation of the heart.
  Stools.—Watery; thin, bilious, liquid
and greenish; brownish, yellow, faecal;
profuse; of cadaverous  smell;  colic in
abdomen.
  Aggravation.—During exanthemata;
after taking cold  in summer; at night.
         ARSENICUM ALBUM.
  It is one of the most important and
deep-acting remedies in cholera.  But 
54           Therapeutics
it requires a great deal of caution to
use  it,  for in ignorant  and  careless
hands  it produces much harm.   It is
for  this reason, Dr. Bell says:  "There
is reason that as  routine is easier than
study,  Arsenicum  may have   accom-
plished more  harm than  good in the
hands  of  Homoeopathic practitioners.
No  remedy has been  more frequently
given in acute affections of the bowels,
while it is not the  most frequently in-
dicated, and it is not a remedy to be
unwisely used."

  Characteristics.— Great  prostration;
rapid sinking of the  life  forces.   De-
pressed, melancholic,  despairing, indif-
ferent, fearful, restless, anxious and full
of anguish.

  Great restlessness, constantly chang-
ing place.

  Violent,  unquenchable  thirst,  with
frequent drinking  of  small quantities 
             of Cholera.          55
of water.   Desire  for acid, cold water
and spirits.

  Vomiting after  eating  or  drinking.
Violent pains in the stomach and burn-
ing in the  stomach and  abdomen.

  Urine retained or suppressed.

  Stupor with  hot skin; twitching  of
limbs and  tonic spasms of the fingers
and toes.

  Skin cold and covered  with clammy
perspiration,  though the  patient com-
plains of  intense  burning heat inter-
nally.

  Great weakness, fainting and rapid
exhaustion.  Very rapid or scarcely
perceptible pulse.

  Restless  sleep, broken by starts and
convulsions.

  Dunham says:  "The fact cannot be
too often  called   to mind,  nor  too 
56           Therapeutics
strongly insisted upon, that our most
characteristic indication  for the use of
a drug which presents such well-defined
general  symptoms as Arsenic does, and
indeed as every other well-proven drug
does, are derived not from its local ac-
tion upon  any  organ or system, not
from a knowledge of the particular tis-
sues it affects, and how it affects them,
but upon general constitutional symp-
toms and their conditions and concom-
itants,  If  this  were not  so,  in  the
presence of how many maladies, of the
intimate nature of which we are  wholly
ignorant, and  which nevertheless  we
cure, should we be utterly powerless for
good?"
  In diarrhoea  after  eating  and drink-
ing, Arsenic is  a good medicine.
  Stools.—Dark  color, watery;  offens-
ive odor; greenish, watery and mucous;
often painless.   Burning of the rectum
and anus. 
of Cholera.           57
  Aggravation.—After eating; at night;
after midnight (1 to 3 a. m.); fro;n cold
food and drink.
  Amelioration.—From external heat
(pains)  and cold air.
              CAMPHOR.
  Catnphor is one of our very import-
ant medicines in cholera, especially in
the very beginning of the disease.  It
may be also useful in the collapse stage.
Dunham says: "In  Camphor collapse
is more  prominent;  in Verat.  alb., the
evacuations and  vomiting; in Cuprum,
the cramps."
  Characteristics. — Sudden and  great
sinking  of strength;  great  anguish;
coldness. of the whole  body;   weak
voice; violent or no thirst; wild, star-
ing and unconscious look.
  The vomiting and diarrhoea suddenly
cease,  and  the  child becomes uncon-
scious.
      8 
58           Therapeutics
  In  cholera, great sinking  and col-
lapse, sometimes without stool or vom-
iting.  Cold as death, but cannot bear
to be covered.   (Bell.)
  Stools.—Blackish; dark brown; large,
thin and involuntary;  like  rice water;
generally painless; attack sudden.
  Aggravation.— During cholera epi-
demic; in summer; in pernicious fever.

          CARBO  VEGEBILIS.
  It is one of our prime remedies  in
cases of cholera in  its  collapse stage,
when all reactive power of  the system
is at abeyance.  Many physicians and
other persons laugh at the medicinal
properties of charcoal.  They say it is
an  inert  substance, but  Hahnemann
proved  and showed its clinical virtue.
He says: " Their (carbons  generally)
medicinal virtues  are latent,  and can
only be elicited by trituration  and suc-
cussion as taught  in Vol.  I.  'Chronic 
             of  Cholera.           59
Diseases.'"   Dr.  H.  C.  Allen  very
justly remarks:  "It is only after  ex-
tended potentization that the symptoms
on  healthy persons steadily increased,
so that to the proving of the triturated
(potentized) vegetable charcoal we  are
indebted for the greatest  discovery in
the history of medicine, viz:  that  the
dynamic is the only curative force in
drugs.  This great discovery  of  Hah-
nemann is certainly destined  to  revo-
lutionize the art of healing."

   Characteristics. — Symptoms  of  im-
perfect  oxidation  of  blood.   For  the
complaints of persons, either young or
old, who have suffered from exhausting
diseases—diarrhoea, haemorrhages, pro-
fuse sweat and suppuration.
  Weak digestion: the simplest food
disagrees.  Excessive accumulation of
gas in  the stomach or intestines, tem-
porary relief from  eructation.  Want
of susceptibility to  medicinal action. 
60           Therapeutics
Want of nervous  irritability or of the
vital reactive power.
  Hectic fever; exhaustive night sweat,
profuse, putrid, sour perspiration ;  sal-
low complexion, sunken features, vital
forces nearly exhausted.   (Hering.)

  Characteristics.—In cholera: collapse
without stool.   Nose, cheek and fingers
icy  cold.   Desire to be fanned.  Hic-
cough  and vomiting.   Greenish,  pale
color of the face.  Sopor without vom-
iting, stool or cramps.   Congestion of
blood to  the  head and chest.  Pulse
thready, intermittent and scarcely per-
ceptible.
  Stools.—Bloody, brown,  watery and
slimy ; black and  semi-liquid ; frequent,
involuntary.
  Aggravation. — From  chilling  the
stomach  with  ice water  when over-
heated.    After  long-continued severe
acute disease.   After loss of fluid. 
of Cholera.           61
              CUPRUM.
  Cuprum is one of our most  trusted
and  efficacious  remedies in  cholera;
always useful from  the beginning of
an attack to its collapse stage.  It is
especially valuable in severe cramps of
the extremities.   Both  Cuprum metal-
licum and aceticum are used.
  Hahnemann was a  great advocate of
Cuprum in cases of cholera.
  Characteristics. — Restless   tossing
about and  constant uneasiness.  Face
distorted and blue. Sunken eyes.  Ex-
cessive  thirst;  drink  descends  the
oesophagus  with  a   gurgling  sound.
Deathly nausea and  retching; vomit-
ing of water with flakes, with violent
colic and cramps.  Violent pains in the
stomach.  Feeling of constriction be-
neath the sternum.   Violent spasm in
the abdomen and upper and lower ex-
tremities, with piercing screams.  Dysp-
noea  so great that the patient cannot 
62           Therapeutics
bear a handkerchief before the  face.
Sighing respiration.  Urine suppressed
or scanty.   Comatose sleep after vom-
iting.  Intense coldness and  blueness
of surface, with cold sweat and great
prostration.
  Uraemic convulsion with loquacious
delirium, and followed by apathy and
collapse.
  Aggravation.—During epidemic chol-
era.
  Amelioration.—From drinking cold
water (vomiting).
  Stools.—Watery, with  flakes.  Fre-
quent but not quite copious.

         HYDROCYANIC  ACID.
  It is our sheet anchor in severe cases
of cholera  collapse;  in  fact,  it often
brings a corpse  to life.   Dr. Hering
says:  "In  the last  stage  of Asiatic
cholera, when diarrhoea has ceased and
vomiting decreased, when  there  is an- 
             of Cholera.           63
guish, with  pressure on the chest, and
the patient becomes cold, with gradual
extinction of pulse.

  Characteristics.—Despondency and op-
pression.  Vexed  mood.   Loss of con-
sciousness.  Eyes distorted  and  half
open.  In Asiatic cholera there is sud-
den and great prostration.  Absence of
thirst or violent thirst; fluid runs down
the  oesophagus with  gurgling noise.
Epileptiform attacks of fainting.  Vom-
iting of a black fluid.  Intense gastric
pains.

  Retention of urine.  Uraemia  and
asphyxia from uraemia.

  Noisy, agitated and spasmodic breath-
ing.   Tightness of chest and sense of
suffocation.    Rattling, moaning  and
slow breathing. Dyspnoea.  Irregular
and  feeble  breathing  of heart,  pulse
hardly to be  felt.  General weakness,
loss  of power and great exhaustion. 
64           Therapeutics
  Stools.—Involuntary stools, hiccough
and great prostration.  Sudden cessa-
tion of discharges.  Rapid progress to-
wards asphyxia.  Green, watery stool.
  Aggravation.—After   eating   and
drinking.  In the evening.   After cold
food.
            IPECACUANHA.
  This medicine is especially suited to
cholera infantum and gastric variety of
cholera.  In cholera  infantum  it may
be followed  by Arsenic.  (Bell.)
  Characteristics. — Dejected and  mo-
rose.  Irritability and impatience.  Cold
sweat on forehead.  Eyes sunken and
blue margin around them.  Thirst or
thirstlessness.   Hiccough with nausea.
Nausea  distressing; constant;  empty
eructation;  accumulation of saliva in
mouth;  qualmishness;  vomiting of
ingesta,  bile, grass-green  mucus, pu-
trid, blood  or pitch-like substances or
sour fluid. 
             of  Cholera.           65
   Stools.—Green mucus,  as  green as
grass; greenish,  watery.  Bloody  and
fermentable.   Bilious.  Dark, almost
black, like frothy  molasses.   Putrid
and frequent.
   Aggravation.— In  the  evening  or
night.  During  dentition.  After  un-
ripe fruit and vegetables.
   Amelioration.—From rest.

           IRIS VERSICOLOR.
   It is a  useful  medicine  in  what is
called English cholera or summer diar-
rhoea or  cholera morbus.   It may be
used in Asiatic cholera with rice-water
stools, cramp and other symptoms, but
not so frequently.
   Characteristics.—Low spirited. Fear
of approaching illness.  Sunken eyes.
   Acid and sour eructation.   Heart-
burn.  Nausea and vomiting  of  sour
fluid,  food or  sweetish  water,  soured
milk  in  children,  yellow   or  viciated
       9 
66           Therapeutics
bile.  Burning from mouth and anus.
Violent efforts to vomit.  Vomiting of
extremely acid fluid, which excoriates
the throat.
  Stools.—Watery, watery with mucus.
Premonitory diarrhoea  with vomiting
and cramps.  Involuntary  evacuation
of rice-water character.   Body icy cold.
  Aggravation.----At night, from 2 to
3 a. m.   In hot weather.
  Amelioration.—Of colic by  passing
flatus and bending double.
          PHOSPHORIC ACID.
  This  is  a medicine for premonitory
diarrhoea and cholera  morbus, often
cutting short the disease.  It  is also
useful in cases of mild delirium and in
convalescence when general ^weakness
of the system is the predominant char-
acter.
  Characteristics.—Apathy and indiffer-
ence.  Somnolency.  Quiet delirium. 
             of  Cholera.           67
   Pale and waxy complexion.  Bleed-
ing from gums.  Thirst for large quan-
ties  of water.  Distention of abdomen
with gurgling noise.  Profuse emission
of pale, watery urine which debilitates
the patient;  opaque, milky white sedi-
ment in urine.
   Profuse  debilitating  perspiration  at
night.  Cramps in the extremities, es-
pecially the upper.
   The  patient  gains flesh  in  spite of
diarrhoea.
   Stools.—White  watery;  thin yellow
with  sediment; whitish, gray, faecal;
undigested; involuntary; painless and
very offensive.
  Aggravation.—From depressing men-
tal emotion;  young persons who have
grown rapidly.   After stool.

               RICINUS.
  The use of this remedy is compara-
tively new  in the  Homoeopathic school 
68           Therapeutics
for  cases of cholera.  Drs. Salzer and
Bhaduri are among the foremost I know
who gave it a fair trial in cholera cases
in India, but Dr. Hale, of Chicago, gave
us a hint long before for its use in chol-
era cases.

  Characteristics.—Indifference; no fear
or apprehension. Profound exhaustion.
Face  pale  and  death-like.  The  skin
cold and shrunken.   Drowsy.   Loss of
consciousness.   Vertigo.   Buzzing  in
ear.  Collapse.  Burning thirst.  Nau-
sea and  vomiting.   Vomiting of  rice-
water  substance or  bile.  Cramps  in
the stomach.  Complete suppression of
urine.  Attack slow and insidious, often
from indigestion and diarrhoea.

   Stools.—Rice water.  Bilious watery.
Mucous and bilious.  Faecal,  bloody
and slimy.
   Aggravation. — From   eating   and
drinking.  In summer. 
of Cholera.           69
               SULPHUR.
   It is a remedy in almost all diseases,
and so it is useful in cholera.   Many
Homoeopathic physicians have an  im-
pression that Sulphur is only used in
chronic cases, so it is not applicable in
such  an acute disease as cholera,  but
they  are mistaken.   I  have adminis-
tered  it in  various  stages  of  cholera
with most gratifying results.  Of course
it must be given with a  due care as to
its proper indications.

   Sulphur may be said to be the central
remedy of our Materia Medica.  It has
well-defined  rotations with  every  drug
we use.   The great utility of Sulphur
arises  from this peculiarity; it is our
mainstay in defective reaction.  When
the system   refuses to respond to  the
well-selected  remedy, it matters  not
what  the disease may be, whether it
corresponds characteristically with  the
syptomatology of  Sulphur  or  not, it 
70           Therapeutics
will often be the remedy to clear up the
case, or pave the way for another drug
which will cure.  (Farrington.)

  Characteristics.—Anxious and fear-
ful.  Melancholy;  depressed about  ill-
ness.
  Eyes sunken,  surrounded  by blue
margin.  Face pale  and collapse with
expression of anxiety.  Tongue brown
or coated white.
  Thirst much and drinks  large quan-
tity.  Desire for sweets but aversion to
meat.  Hiccough; eructation empty or
tasting of food.  Hunger and voracious
appetite, with burning of  stomach.
Griping or pinching colic in abdomen.
Distension and hardness of abdomen.
Emission of  fetid flatus.  Rumbling
and gurgling in bowels.

   Retention or total suppression  of
urine.  Frequent  urging  to urinate.
Only  a few drops   discharged, with 
             of  Cholera.           71
burning in the  urethra.  Feels suffo-
cated ; labored and heavy breathing.
   Pulse feeble, full, hard, accelerated,
at times intermittent.   Hands and feet
icy cold or burning.   Cramps in the
leg.  Sleepiness  in  the evening, night
restless.  Sleeping with half-open eyes.
Screaming  out in  sleep.   Jerks  and
twitching during sleep.  Patient lies in
dull and  stupid  state, with  muttering
delirium,  talking incoherently.   Skin
dry and  flabby.   Offensive  odor of
body,   despite   frequent   washings.
Flushings of  heat.   Chilliness about
the  lower part  of body.   Excessive
prostration and rapid emaciation.
   Stools.—Sudden call for stool on wak-
ing in morning.  Stools watery, brown
or green.   Watery, thin fecal, change-
able, hot, frothy, sour smelling or fetid.
Involuntary, with sudden explosion.
   Cholera  infantum generally begins
after midnight;  diarrhoea and vomit- 
 7 2           Therapeu tics
 ing;  discharge from bowels  watery;
 green and  involuntary.   Sometimes
 sour  smell,  at  other times offensive.
 Vomiting  frequent,  often  sour,  with
 cold  perspiration  on face.  Face  pale,
 fontanelles open,  hands and feet cold,
 Child lies in  stupor with eyes  half
 open, not much thirst and entire sup-
 pression of urine; psoric patients prone
 to eruptions and  excoriations;  hydro-
 cephaloid symptoms.

  Cholera Asiatica: As a prophylactic,
 a pinch  of powdered milk of Sulphur
 worn in stocking,  iu contact with soles
 of feet; diarrhoea  commences between
 midnight and morning with or without
 pain, with or without  vomiting,  inef-
 fectual  desire  to  evacuate;  diarrhoea
 and vomiting at same time; numbness
 of limbs, cramps in  soles of feet and
 coldness;  blueness under eyes; cold-
 ness of skin ; indifference of mind; dur-
ing convalescence, red spots, furuncles, 
             of Cholera.           73^
etc; susceptibility to temperature, warm
things ; feet hot; nerve symptoms.
   Aggravation.—Early in the morning
in bed.   In the evening and after mid-
night.  After taking milk.  After sup-
pression of eruptions.   During sleep.
   Amelioration.—By heat and dry heat
on abdomen (colic).
         VERATRUM ALBUM.
   The use of this remedy in cholera is
very  extensive and effective.  I have
been frequently in the habit of using it
rather in the  fully developed stage of
the  disease,   and  with good results.
Veratrum is  a remedy of  great value,
and  one often  required, but like  all
others it demands  a  careful selection,
and is not to be given in every case of
cholera morbus or cholera.   The most
characteristic symptoms are the same
in both cases, only more violent in  the
latter.  The immediate accompaniments
of the stools, with the thirst and crav-
       10 
74           Therapeutics
ings,  distinguish this remedy.   Vera-
trum  is seldom  indicated in  painless
cases.
  Characteristics.—Depression of mind
and despondency.  Fear and anxiety.
  Cold sweat on the forehead, with an-
guish and fear of death.
  Face:  collapsed; pale, bluish;  nose
pointed, of leaden hue, alternately pale
and red, sunken, with anxious expres-
sion;  pinched  up,  death-like,  hippo-
cratic.  Eyes sunken,  distorted  and
turned up.  Grinding of teeth.  Tongue
coated yellowish  brown, back  part
black.
  Thirst great  and,  during perspira-
tion, for large quantities of very cold
water and acid  drinks;   craves  fruits
and juicy things.
  Hiccough.   Vomiting  forcible, exces-
sive,  violent,  with  continual  nausea,
retching and great prostration.   Vom- 
             of Cholera.           75
iting of thin, yellowish substance and
of rice-water character.  Pains in stom-
ach  as from  ravenous hunger.  Sink-
ing  and empty  feeling in  abdomen.
Violent colic.  Abdomen distended and
sensitive.
   Retention of urine, frequent and con-
tinuous urging to urinate.
   Voice weak and hoarse.
   Respiration weak, cold breath,  con-
striction of chest.  Typhoid fever, es-
pecially  during cholera season, when
vital forces suddenly sink.   Coma.
   Cholera  Infantum :  Attack sudden;
violent  watery purging and vomiting;
cold  surface;  prostration;   vomiting.
excited  by  least amount  of  liquid
taken; great thirst for large quantities
of  water;  excessive weakness,  stools
watery  and   inodorous;  tongue  and
breath cold;   difficulty of breathing;
desire to sit  up; blueness around the
eyes; skin becomes drawn tightly over 
76           Therapeutics
bones of  face; wrinkling  of skin  of
hands and fingers;  sensation over ab-
domen.
  Cholera Morbus: Increased at night;
cold sweat  on forehead;  vomiting and
purging at the same  time;  after fruits;
with  profuse  brownish  discharges;
thirst; cramps in the  calves, feet and
fingers;  prostration;  great  weakness
after stools.
  Cholera  Asiatica:  Great  torpor  of
vegetative  system, without any  great
mental  or sensory  disturbance;  little
depression of spirits; fear  of death  or
indifference;  vertigo;  violent  evacua-
tions upward and downward; icy cold-
ness of the body; great debility; cramps
in calves;  vomiting, with constant de-
sire for cold  drinks;  copious,  watery,
inodorous  stools  mixed  with  white
flakes; face pale, without  any  color or
bluish,  blue  margins  on  the  eyes;
deathly  anguish  in   features;   cold 
             of Cholera.           J J
tongue   and  breath;   hoarse,  feeble
voice; great oppression and anguish in
chest, giving patient a desire to escape
from bed;   violent  colic, especially
around  the  umbilicus,  as  if the abdo-
men would be torn open; abdomen sen-
sitive to  contact, with drawing  and
cramps in fingers;  wrinkled  skin  of
palms of hands;  retention of urine.
   Stools.—Watery, with  flakes;  rice-
water, watery and greenish, frequent,
profuse and sometimes painless.
   Aggravation.—In summer; by drink-
ing; after fruits and from taking cold. 
t 
REPERTORY.
Cholera: Aeon., Ats.,  Camph.,  Carbo  veg.,
       Cicuta, Colch., Cnpr., Hydro. acid, fair.,
       Merc, sol., Phos., Phos. ac., Podo., Sec.,
       Stdph.,  Tabac.,  Verat.
     asphyctica s.  sicca: Camph., Carbo veg.,
       Laur., Tabac.
     infantum: Aeon., Apis met, AZthu.,Anl.
       c, Ant.  t.,  Arg. nit., Ars., Bell., Bis.,
       Calc. c, Camph., Carbo v.,  Colch., Coloc,
       Crot. t.,  Elat, Grat.,  Helleborus,  Ipec,
       Iris v., Jatr., Kali  bich.,  Laur., Phos.,
       Podo..  Sarsap.,  Sec,  Sulph.,  Tabac.,
        Verat., Zincum.
     morbus: Aeon., Ant. c,  Ant.  t.,  Ars ,
       Camph.,  Colch.,  Coloc., Crot.  /.,  Elat.,
       Grat., Ipec,  Iris v.,  Jatr., Kali bich.,
       Phos., Phos.  ac, Podo., Ricinus,  Sec.,
        Tabac,  Verat.

         CHARACTER OF THE STOOLS.
 Albuminous:  Diosc, Jatropha,  Natr. m.
 Attack, sudden:  Camph., Cupr., Sec 
80               Cholera.
Stools, bilious: Aeon., sEthu.,  Agar., Aloe,
       Ant. tart.,  Ars.,  Carbol.  ac, Cham.,
       China,   Cina,   Coloc,  Corn,  c,  Cub.,
       Diosc,  Dulc,  Elat., Fluor,  ac,  Ipec,
       Lept., Lit. tig., Mere, c, Merc v., Phos.,
       Podo., Puis., Sulph., Verat., Zinc.
    brown: Ars.,  Camph,, Merc,  c, Sulph.,
       Tart ,  Verat.
    greenish:  Ars.,  Bell.,  Canth., Cham.,
       Ipec, Laur., Merc, Nux  vom., Phos.,
       Phos. ac, Sulph., Verat.
    gray,  or  slightly  whitish:  Aeon.,  Ars.,
       Bell.,  Carbo v., Cham., Lach., Merc,
       Phos , Phos. ac, Puis., Rhus, Sulph.,
       Verat.
    liquid: Ar?i., Ars., Carbo v., Chin., Cic,
      /at., Lach.,  Meph., Phos., Phos.  ac,
       Secale,  Verat.
    liquid and whitish: Ars., Camph., Cupr.,
      /at., Phos., Phos. ac, Sec, Verat.
    liquid and whitish,  with  white coated
       tongue:  Cupr., Phos., Sec.
    liquid, with  continual pain at the pit of
       the  stomach:  Ars.,  Camph.,  Chin.,
       Cupr., Phos., Verat.
    liquid, with  rumblings in the intestines:
       Ars., /at., Nux v., Petr.,  Phos., Phos.
       ac,  Puis.,  Rhus, Sec,  Sulph., Tart.,
       Verat. 
Repertory.              81
Stools, liquid, evacuation painful (attended
       with  colic):  Ars.,  Carbo  v.,  Phos.,
       Spig.,  Staph.,  Verat.
    evacuation   painless:  Ars.,   Carbo  v.,
       Chin., Cic. Phos , Phos. ac, Sec, Spig.,
       Verat.
    mucous  and watery:  Ars., Bell.,  Chin.,
       Ipec,  Nux v.,  Phos., Phos.  ac,  Puis.,
       Rhus,  Sec, Sulph. ac, Tart.. Verat.
    like rice water, or stools like whey  or
       water, with  whitish or grayish  flocks
       in it:  Ars.,  Camph., Cupr.,  Ipec,/at.,
       Phos.,  Phos. ac, Secale, Verat. If there
       is inflammation, consult also  Aco?i.,
       Bry. and Rhus t.
    like rice water, or watery, grayish, whit-
       ish and flocculent,  with great  thirst:
       Ars., Camph., Cupr., Ipec, Phos., Phos.
       ac,  Verat.  With fever, Aeon., Bry.,
       or Rhus tox.
    Aeon.,  Ars.,  Camph., Bell., Cham.  Chin.,
       Cupr., Ipec, /at , Merc, Nux v., Phos.,
      Phos. ac,  Sec, Sulph.,  Verat.
    watery  and  white, flocky,  with  cramp
      and thirst: Aeon., Ars., Bry., Camph ,
       Cupr., Ipec, Phos., Phos. ac. Rhus tox.,
      Sec, Verat.
        II 
82               Cholera.
Stools watery and white  flocky, with clonic
      spasms  (spasmodic  movements)  and
      thirst:  Aeon.,  Ars.,  Bty.,  Camph.,
      Cupr.,  Ipec,  Phos.,   Phos.  ac, Sec,
       Verat.
    whitish  flocks,  with  pulselessness   or
      scarcely perceptible pulse: Aeon., Ars.,
      Bry.,  Camph.,  Phos.  ac,  Rhus, Sec,
       Verat.
    watery or liquid,  with  white flocky  in
      grains,  having  the  consistence  and
      color of tallow: Phos
    yellow (especially in the  early stage of
      the disease): Ars., Cham., Ipec , Mete,
      Phos., Phos. ac,  Tart., Verat.
    thin,  watery,  with nausea:  Ars.,  Ipec,
      Merc, Phos.
    thin,  watery, with vomiting of watery
      liquid  and  food:  Ars.,   Ctipr.,  Ipec,
      Phos., Verat.

           NAUSEA AND VOMITING.
Nausea  with  thirst:  Bapt.,  Bell.,  Phos.,
       Verat.
    with  gagging  (retching):  Ant.  tart.,
      A?n.,  Asar. c, Bell., Bis., Bry., Chin.,
      Coloc, Crot.,  Hell., Ign., Ipec,/abor.,
      Nux v., Pod.,  ]Terat. 
Repertory.              83
Nausea with vertigo:  Camph., Merc, Verat.
    with continued  pain at  the  pit  of  the
      stomach: Aeon., Ars., Bell., Camphor,
      Cham.,  Cupr., Merc , Nat. mur., Nux
      v., Phos.,  Pulsat.,  Rhus  tox., Sulph.,
       Tart.,  Verat.
    with diarrhoea: Ars , Ipec, Merc, Phos.
    with hunger: Ignat.
    with pale face and suppressed breathing:
      Ipecac
Vomiting:  Aeon., Ambra, Anac, Ant., Arg.
      n., Ars., Bell.,  Calc,  Camph.,  Caust.,
      Cham.,  China,  Cic, Cin.,  Cole, Con.,
      Cupr., Dig., Ferr., Gam., Grat., Ignat.,
      Ipec, Iris  v., Lach., Laur., Lye, Nat.
      mur.,  Nux m ,  Nux  v.,  Op , Peir.,
      Phos.,  Plb., Pulsat,  Sec.  cor..  Sep.,
      Sulph., Sulph.  ac, Tart., Verat., Zinc.
    after a  meal, with  blueness  of the lips:
      Ars., Phos.
    after drinking: Am., Ars.,  Bry., Ipec,
      Nix vom.,  Puts., Verat.
    after drinking, with blueness of the face:
      Ars.,  Verat.
    acrid: Arg., Ferr.,  Hep.,  Iris, Ipecac.
    after drinking: Am., Ars., Bry., Nux,
      Puis.,  Verat
    foamy or  frothy:   sEth.,  Crot.,  Cupr.,
      Podo.,  Tart.,  Verat. 
84               Cholera.

Vomiting of food: Ant,  Ars ,  ALth.,  Bell.,
      Bry..  Calc  carb.,  Carbo  veg., Cham.,
      Chin., Cina, Cocc, Colch ,  Coloc,  Crot.,
      Cupr., Ferr., Hyosc, Ignat., Ipec, Iris,
      Laur., Nat. mur., Nux, Phos.,  Phos.
      ac, Pod.,  Pulsat., Tart.,  Verat.
    of water, then food:  Nux vom.
    of food, then water: Pulsat.
    of food,  undigested:  Kali  bich.,  Lye,
      Phos.
    of watery liquid analagous to that  of the
      stools,  with  pieces of  mucus:  Ars.,
      Bell., Camphor, Cuprum, /atroph., Sec,
      Ipec , Stram.,  Verat.
    with pain  in  the stomach:  Ars.,  Bry.,
       Camph.,  Cupr., Ipecac,  Lach.,  Nux,
      Phos., Sulph.,  Stram., Tart.,  Verat.
    with colic:  Ars.,  Cupr.,   Nux,  Phos.,
      Puis., Stram., Tart.,  Verat.
    with colic  and  diarrhoea:  Ars.,  Cupr.,
      Phos., Stram.,  Tart., Verat.
    with  lassitude:   Ars.,  Camph.,   Ipecac,
       Phos.,  Verat.

                  STOMACH.
 Stomach,  anxiety,  distention  and  pressure
       at the pit of the: Ars.
    burning in: Ars., Bell., Bismuth,  Bryo., 
                Repertory.             85

      Camph., Cham.,  Cicuta,   Carbo veg.,
      Croton, /atrop., Secale, Tabac,  Verat.
Stomach, burning in, great: Iris v.
    burning in the pit of:  Aeon., Ars., Bell.,
      Bry., Laur., Merc, Nux, Phos., Sec,
      Verat.
    burning heat in the pit of: Ars., Camph.,
      Hydro, ac , Phos.
    burning  sensation in the, sometimes ex-
      tending along  the oesophagus  to  the
      mouth: Ars.
    cramp in the: Bell., Bry., Carbo, Cham.,
      Cuprum, Nat. mur., Nux, Phos., Sec,
      Verat.
    coldness in: Caps.,  Colch., Grat.
    continued pain at the pit, with  nausea:
      Aeon., Ars.,  Bell.,   Camph.,  Cham.,
      Cupr., Merc, Nat.  mur., Nux, Phos.,
      Rhus, Sulph., Tart.,  Verat.
    continued pain at the pit, with rumblings
      in the intestines: Aeon.,  Ars.,  Bell.,
      Camph, Carbo veg.,  Cupr, /at., Merc,
      Nat. mur , Nux, Phos., Phos.  ac, Puis.,
      Rhus, Secale, Sulph.,  Tart., Verat.
    pains in: Am., Ars., Coccul., Coloc, Cupr ,
      /at.,  Lye, Zing.
    pains in, with vomiting  and  nausea:
      Aeon., Ars.,  Bell.,   Camph.,  Cham., 
86
Cholera.
       Cupr.,  Ipec,  Merc, Nat.  mur., Nux.
       Phos., Tart.,  Verat.
Stomach, pressive or aching pains at the pit,
       with liquid stools: Ars., Camph., Cupr.,
       Phos., Sec, Tart.,  Verat.
    pressive or aching  pains at the pit, with
       cramps or other spasms in the extrem-
       ities  or  elsewhere:   Camph ,   Ctipr.,
       Phos., Phos. ac, Nat. mur., See, Tart.,
       Verat.
    sensibility and swelling of  the pit  of:
       Hep., Lye , Sulph.
    sensibility and  swelling, with  pains of
       the  extremities:  Ars., Camph.,  Cupr.,
       Natr. m., Phos., Phos. ac, Verat.
                 ABDOMEN.
Pains in the abdomen, with diarrhoea: Ars.,
       Cham., Ipecac, Laur., Merc, Merc, e,
       Natr.  m.,  Nux,  Phos.,  Rhus  tox.,
       Stram., Sulph., Tart.,  Verat.
Rumblings in the intestines, with continued
       pain in the pit of stomach: Aeon., Ars.,
       Bell.,  Camph., Carb.  v.,  Cupr., /at.,
       Merc, Natr. m.,  Nux, Phos., Phos. ac,
       Puis., Rhus,  Sec, Sulph., Tart., Verat.
    in the intestines, with liquid stools: Ars.,
      /atroph., Nux, Petr.,  Phos , Phos.  ac ,
       Puts., Rhus,  See, Sulph., Tart, Verat. 
                Repertory.              87

Throbbings in the abdomen:  Caps., Ignat.,
       Op., Plumb., Sang., Tart.

                  PUESE.
Pulse feeble  and  frequent: Ars.,  Carb.  v.,
       Lach., Nix, Rhus, Rad.
    failing: Ferr.
    full: Aeon., Bapt.,  Gels., Op.
    hard: Aeon., sEth., Bell., China.
    feeble  and slow:  Camph.,  Dig.,  Laur.,
      Merc, Puts., Rhus  rad.,  Verat.
    feeble  and small: Ars.,  Camph.,  China,
      Dig.,  Laur.,  Nux, Phos. ac,  Puis.,
      Rhus., Verat.
    scarcely  perceptible, with  watery and
      white flocky stools: Aeon., Ars., Bry.,
      Camph.,  Phos. ac, Rhus, See, Verat.
    imperceptible: Ars., Carb. v., Crotal, Kali
      brom., Laur., Terb.
    intermitting: Carbo veg., Hell., Nitric ac.
    irregular: China, Laur.,  Tabac
    rapid: Aeon., sEth., Ant. t., Ars., Bell.,
      China, /abor.
    slow: Cupr.,  Dig.,  Laur.,  Mur. ac, Op.
    small: A£.th., Bell.,  Cupr.
    soft:  Bapt., Cupr.
    weak: Ant. tart., Cupr., Dig., Kali brom.,
      Kali  c, Kreas., Merc, cor., Mur. ac,
      Tabac 
88
Cholera.
            HEART  AND  CHEST.
Heart, beating of, not rapid, but too violent:
      Dig.
    ii regular action of: Laur.
    irregular action of, with great cardiac an-
      guish: Laur.
    irregular action of, with suffocative  at-
      tacks: Laur.
    oppression of:  Tabac.
    palpitation of: Ant. t.,  Cact., Cycl.
    palpitation of, worse from least exertion:
      Iod.
Anguish in the  chest:  Aeon.,  Ars.,  Bell.,
      Bry., Camph., Carb. v.,  Cicuta, Cupr.,
      Hydrocyan.  ac,  Ipec, /atro.,  Laur.,
      Nat.  mur., Phos., Phos. ac, Rhus tox.,
      Stram.,  Verat.
Constriction   (spasmodic)   of  the   chest:
      Camph.,  Caust., Cupr.,  Ferr.,  Ipecac,
      Lach.,  Nitric ac,  Nux,  Op.,  Phos.,
      Phos. ac, Puis., Spig., Stram., Sulph.,
       Verat.
Cramps or tonic spasms in  the chest: Ars.,
      Bell., Camph., Caust., Cic, Cupr., Fer.,
      Graph., Hyos., Ipecac, Kal., Merc, Nux,
      Op.,  Phos., Phos. ac, Puis., Sec, Sep.,
      Stram., Sulph., Verat. 
                Repertory.              89

Cramps in the muscles of the chest,  with
      continual vomitings, and with the eyes
      turned upwards: Camph., Cic,  Verat.
               RESPIRATION.
Respiration difficult: Arg.  n., Asa/., Elat.,
      Puis.
    labored: Apis, Arg. n.,  Carb.  v.,  Cic,
      Cupr.
    labored, with cold and  blue skin:  Ars.,
      Camph , Carb.  v., Cupr.,  Ipec,  Sec,
       Verat.
    feeble:  China, Laur.
    oppressed: Crotal., Cupr.,  Ipec,  Sulph.,
      Tabac, Thuja,  Verat.
    rattling: Op.
    short:  Thuja.
    sighing: Arg. n., Ignat.
    slow: Laur.
    snoring: Op.
                  VOICE.
Voice, choleraic: Ferr.
    feeble:  Camph., Sec, Verat.
    hoarse: Camph.,  Carb. v., Sec,  Verat.
    hoarse, face choleraic:  Ars.,  Camph.,
      Carb. v.,  Cupr., Laur.,  Phos.,  Rhus,
      Sec,  Verat.
    hollow: Sec.
        12 
90
Cholera.
Voice, inaudible: Sec.
    last:  Carb. v.
    weak: Hell.
Yawning: Ant. tart., Elat., Plant., Podo.

                   URINE.
Urine,  retention  of:  Canth.,  Lach.,   Op.,
      Plum., Verat.
    retention of,  with ineffectual  desire  to
      urinate, at the commencement of reac-
      tion: Canth., Verat.
    scanty  or  suppressed:  Ars.,  Camph.,
      Carb.  v.,  Cupr., Ipec,  Sec,  Stram.,
       Verat.
    scanty, with fever: Bell., Carb. v., Rhus
      t.,  Stram.
    diminished, with cramps in the calves of
      the legs: Ars., Carb. v., Cupr., Hyos.,
      Lach., Lye, Merc, Nux,  Rhus, Secale,
      Sidph.,  Verat.
    interrupted: Con.
    frequent: Apis.
    involuntary: Bell., Caust , Cham., Hyos.,
    Merc v., Sep., Sil.
               PERSPIRATION.
Perspiration, cold: Aeon., Ars., Bell., Bry.,
       Calc, Camph., Canth., Carb.  v., Cham., 
                Repertory.              91

       Chin.,  Cin.,  Co/., Cupr., Dulc, Hell.,
       Hep., Hyos., Ignat., Ipecac, Lach., Lye,
       Merc., Nat., Nitric ac., Nux,  Op., Phos.,
       Phos. ac, Plum., Puis., Rheum, Rhus,
       Sabad., Sec, Sep., Sit., Spig., Stram.,
       Sulph., Thuja, Tart.,  Verat.
Perspiration, viscid, clammy: Ars., Camph.,
       Ferr., Hep., /at.,  Lach.,  Merc, Nux,
       Phos., Phos  ac, See,  Verat.
    clammy, with slow pulse: Verat.
    clammy, with  spasmodic movements oi
       the jaw:  Camph.,  Merc, Nux,  Phos.,
       Sec,  Verat.

                 TONGUE.
Tongue, coldness of the: Ars., Bell.,  Camph.,
       Laur., Nat. mur., Sec, Verat.
    coldness of the, and breath: Ars., Carb.
       veg.,  Verat.
    coldness of the, with dryness: Ars., Bell.,
       Sec.,  Verat.
    coldness of the, with cold sweat on the
       body: Ars., See,  Verat.
    coated brown:  Bell., Carb.  v.,  Hyos.,
       Rhus, Sulph.
    coated white: Ant. crud., Ant. tart., Am.,
      Bell.,  Bry., Calc,  Carb., Cupr., Ignat.,
      Mere, Nux, Pelr., Puts., See, Sulph. 
92               Cholera.

Tongue coated  yellow: Bell., Bry., Carb. v.,
      Cham., Chin., Ipec, Nux, Puis., Verat.
    coated  red:  Ars., Bell.,  Bry.,  Cham.,
      Hyos., Lach., Nux v., Rhus,  Sulph.,
       Verat.
    coated red on the tip:  Rhus rad.
    coated red and yellow: Bry., Cham., Nix,
       Verat.
    coated red and  yellow, with pulse slow:
      Bell., Rhus rad.,  Verat.
    coated black: Ars., Lach., Merc  v.
    mapped: Kali bich., Nat. mur.
    moist: Bell., Phos.
    pale,  reddish-blue:  Raph.
    rough:  Rhus tox.
    shining: Apis, Lach.
    smooth:  Kali bich., Lach.
    swollen: Merc. v.
    vesicles at the tip: Lach.
    vesicles on the borders: Apis.
             MIND  AND MOOD.
Anguish: Ars., Camph.,  Verat.
Anxiety: Aeon., Canth., Carbo veg., Cic.
Anger: Ars.
Apathy or indifference:  Ars., Bell., Cham.,
      Camph., Cic,  Hyos., Lach., /atr., Op.,
      Phos., Verat. 
Repertory.             93
Fear of Death, with internal burnings and
      tossing in bed: Ars.
Taciturnity, or repugnance to conversation:
      Ars., Bell., Bry.,  Cale,  Cham ,  Cic,
      Coloc,  Cupr., Ignat.,  Lach.,  Merc,
      Nat.  mur., Nux,  Phos.   ac,  Puis.,
      Sulph., Sulph ac, Verat.

                  HEAD.
Confusion  in the head:  Aeon.,  Ars.,  Bell.,
      Bry., Cale, Caust., Chin.,  Dig., Merc,
      Nux, Op., Phos. ac, Puis., Rhus., Sec,
       Verat.
Heaviness  or pressure in  the  head:  Aeon.,
      Am., Ars., Bell., Bry., Cale, Camph.,
      Carb. v.,  Cham., Chin.,  Cic, Ignat,
      ipec, Lach.,  Laur., Lye, Merc,  Nat.
      mur., Nux, Op.,  Petr., Phos., Phos. ac,
      Puis., Rhus t., Sulph., Tart., Verat.
Vertigo: Aeon., Ant., Am., Ars., Bell., Bry.,
      Cale,  Camph., Carb.  v.,  Caust.,  Cic,
      Cupr.,  Dig.,  Ferr.,  Graph.,   Hep.,
      Hyos., Ignat., Ipec, Lach., Laur., Lye,
      Merc,  Nat.  mur, Nux,   Op., Phos.,
      Phos. ac,  Puts., Rhus t., Thuja, Verat.
    with nausea and thirst:   Verat. 
94               Cholera.

Vertigo, with stupor: Ars., Bell., Bry., Cale ,
       Caust., Laur., Lye, Mere, Nux, Op.,
       Phos., Phos  ac, Puis., Rhus t., See,
       Stram., Tart., Verat.

                   EYES.
Eyes  sunk in their orbits, with livid semi-
       circles under them: Ars., Cale, Cic,
       Cupr.,  Kal.,  Latir., Phos., Phos. ac,
       See,  Stdph.,  Verat.
    sunk in their orbits,  with hoarse voice:
       Ars., Cale, Camph., Cic,  Cupr., Kal.,
       Laur., Phos.,  Phos. ac, Sec,  Sulph.,
       Verat.
    upturned and fixed: Camph., Cis., Verat.
Pupils  contracted :  Ars.,   Bell.,   Cham ,
       Camph , Cic, Nux, Puis., Secale, Sep.,
       Verat.
    bluish color about the: Ars., Cupr., Phos.
       ac, See,  Verat.

                    FACE.
Face bluish: Aeon., Ars., Bell., Bry., Camph.,
       Cham., Cic,  Con.,  Cupr.,  Dig., Dros.,
       Hep., Hyos.,  Ignat., Ipec,  Lach., Lye,
       Merc, Op., Phos., Puis., Samb., Spong.,
       Staph., Stram , Tart.,  Verat. 
Repertory.             95
Face bluish and pale: Ars., Bell., Bry., Camp.,
       Cic, Con., Cupr., Dig.,  Dros., Hep.,
       Hyos., Ignat., Ipec, Lach., Lye, Merc,
       Op., Phos., Puis., Stram., Tart.,  Verat.
Blueness of  the  lips:  Ang.  spur., Ars.,
       Camph.,  Caust.,  Berb.,  Chin, sulph.,
       Cupr., Dig., Lye, Phos.
     of the lips, with withered  appearance of
       the skin:  Ars.,  Camph.,  Cupr., Lye,
       Phos.
     under eyes;  sleeps with eyes open: Ipec,
       Phos. ac, Sulph., Verat.
     of the skin and face: Ars., Cupr.,  Verat.
     of the skin and face, with slow pulse and
       clammy sweat:   Verat.
Face  choleraic:  Ars.,  Ctipr.,  Carb.  v., Ipec ,
       Laur., Phos. ac, Rhus, Sec,  Verat.
Spasm of the  jaw: Bell., Cham., Cic, Cupr.
       ac, Hydro., Lach., Laur., Op., Rhus,
       Sec., Verat.

            UPPER EXTREMITIES.
.Cramps in the upper arms:  Ac, Phos., Sec
     in the forearms: Laur.,  Phos. ac, Sec.
     in the wrist: Phos. ac.
Coldness of the hands:  Aeon ,  Bell., Cham.,
       Ipec, Natr. mur., Nux,  Petr.,  Phos.,
       Sulph., Tart.,  Verat. 
96               Cholera.

Cramps in the hands:  Bell.,  Cale,  Coloc,
      Graph.,  Laur.,  Phos.  ac, See,  Stram.
    of the fingers:  Ars.  Am.,  Lye,  Nux,
      Phos., Phos. ac, Sec, Sulph.,  Verat.
    of the fingers, with clammy perspiration:
      Ars  , Ferr., Nux, Verat.

           LOWER EXTREMITIES.
Coldness  of  the feet:  Aeon.,  Bell.,  Cale,
      Caust., Dig., Ipec, Lach.,  Lye,  Mere,
      Phos.,  Plat., Plumb.,  Rhod.,  Rhus t.,
      Sulph., Tart., Verat.
    in the  hips: Coloc, Phos. ac.
    in  the thighs:  Camph., Cann.,  Hyos.,
      Ipec,  Merc,  Phos. ac,  Rhus,  Sep.,
       Verat.
    in the  hands: Cale, Phos.
    in the  legs: Carbo v.,  Coloc, Cupr., /at.,
      Phos. ac.
    in  the calves of  the  legs:  Ars., Bry.,
      Cale,  Camph., Carb.  v.,  Cham., Coff.,
      Coloc.,  Cupr., Hyos., /at.,  Lach., Lye,
      Merc ac, Nit., Ntix, Phos., Rhus, Sec,
      Sal. n., Sulph.,  Tart.,  Verat.
    in  the calves of the  legs,  with burning
      heat in  the  stomach: Ars.,  Camph ,
      Phos. 
                Repertory.             97

Coldness in the calvesof the legs, with dimin-
      ished secretion of  urine: Ars.,  Carb.
      veg.,  Cupr.,  Hyos., Lach.,  Lye,  Kali
      bich., Merc,  Nux,  Rhus, Sec, Sulph.,
       Verat.
    in the calves, coldness of the feet: Lach.,
      Lye, Phos., Rhus t., Carbo veg., Verat.
    in the feet: Camph., Caust., Graph., Lye,
      Nux, Sec, Tart., Verat.
    in the  feet, with burning in the stomach:
       Camph.
    in the soles of feet: Cale,  Carb. v., Coff.,
      Fur., Hep.,  Phos. ac,  Plumb.,  Sec,
      Stdph.
    in  the toes:  Cale, Fur., Hep.,  Merc,
       Nux, Sec, Srdph.
                   SKIN.
Coldness of skin:  Aeon., Ant.. Am., Ars ,
      Bell., Bry.,  Camph., Canth., Carb.  v.,
       Caust.,   Cham.,   Chin.,  Cic,  Cupr.,
       Dros.,  Dulc,  Fur.,   Graph.,  Hyos..
       Ipec, Lach.,  Laur., Lye, Merc, Ntix,
       Op.,  Phos.,  Phos.  ac,  Rhus, Sabad.,
       Sec , Stram., Sidph., Verat.
Blueness  of the  skin:  Aeon.,  Ars., Bell.,
       Bry., Carb. v., Cupr., Lach., Nux, Op ,
       Rhus, Sec, Verat.
        13 
gS               Cholera.
Cold and bluish, with cold perspiration: Ars ,
      Caust., Cupr., Secale,  Verat.
Blueness of the skin in different parts, and
      withered  appearance:  Cupr.,   Secale,
       Verat.
                  FEVER.
Chill: Camph., Dig.
    mingled with heat: Dig.
Chilliness: Arg. n., Asar. e.,  Camph., Cicuta,
    .  Dig., Elat., Merc, Puis , Sulph.
    when leaving the fire:  Aloe.
Coldness: ^Eth., Camph.,/at., Laur., Tabac
Shuddering: Aeon., Camph.
    internal: Aeon.
    without coldness: Lach. 
INDEX.
Aconite,.................15, 33, 43
Agaricus,....................42
Antimonium tart.,............28, 39, 52
Argeutum nit.,.................46
Arsenic,...............24, 31, 41, 53
Belladonna,..................42
Bryonia,....................43
Calcarea ars.,.............     •   • 44
Cantharis,.........    .........42
Camphor,........10, 12, 14, 15, 19, 33, 39, 57
Carbo veg...................35, 58
Carbolic acid,..................43
Castor oil treatment,  ■■  \...........26
China,......      .  . #.........45, 46
Cholera from damp place, .  .    .........32
Cholera from filth,...............32
Cholera from fruit or ice water,.........32
Cholera outbreaks not traceable to unsanitary con-
    ditions, ...................10
Cholera preventable,..............7
Cobra,.....................37
Collapse,...................30
Colchicum,...................45
Congestion of brain,...............41
Copper as a preventive,.............n
Complications and sequelae,...........40
Croton tig.,.................27, 45
Cuprum met,........10, 12, 14, 21, 38, 44, 61 
ioo                 Index.

Cuprum ars.,..............•  ■ 23, 44
Cuprum, dose,.................23
Curative treatment,...............T3
Dr. Bharduri's experience with Cuprum,.....22
Diarrhoea, obstinate,..............45
Diet,.....................46
Dysentery, .  ..................45
Emotions,...................8
English cholera,................29
Euphorbia,...................27
Exercise,............    .......§
Fasting.....................8
First stage,...................T4
Getting chilled,................8
Hiccough,...................44
Hydrocyanic acid,..........35, 4r, 44, 62
Hyosciamus,..................42
Inhalation of camphor as a prophylactic measure, 12
Inhalation of hydrocyanic acid,.........36
Intemperance,................    8
Ipecac,.............      ......64
Iris ver,,...................29, 65
Jatropha cur.,..................26
Kali bich.,...................43
Mercurius, . .    .............46
Merc, cor.,...................46
Merc, sol...............      ... 43
Muscarin,....................42
Natrum sulph...................45
Naja trip.....................37
Nicotine,.................40, 41, 44
Nux vomica,..................15
Overheated,...................13 
                    Index.                 101

Opium,...................42
Panic......................13
Phosphoric acid,.............43, 45, 66
Phodophyllum,.................45
Preface,....................3
Preventive hygienic measures...........6
Prophylactics,.................10
Pulsatilla,..................  . 15
Repertory—
      Cholera,.................89
      Character of the stools,..........89
      Nausea and vomiting,...........82
      Stomach,................84
      Abdomen,................86
      Pulse,..................87
      Heart and chest,............   88
      Respiration,........        .... 89
      Voice,..................89
      Urine,..................90
      Perspiiation,...............90
      Tongue,.................91
      Mind and mood,.............92
      Head,.................93
      Eyes,...................94
      Face,...................94
      Upper extremities,............95
      Lower extremities,............96
      Skin,...................97
      Stools,.................89
      Fever,    .................98
Rhus tox.,...................43
Ricinus,................      . 24, 67
Second stage,..................15 
io2                Index.
Secale,..................37, 38, 46
Sequelae,..................   4°
Sulphur,..................45, 69
Sulphur, Powder of,...............12
Sulphur, Burning of,..............12
Therapeutics,.................72
Therapeutics of Cholera,............5
Tabacum,...................41
Terebiuthina,..................42
Third stage,..................30
Typhoid.....................42
Ulceration of cornea,  ...   ..........46
Uraemia,....................41
Veratrum, . 10, 12, 14, 15,  16, 18, 22, 39, 43, 44, 73, 74
Veratrum, dose,.................19
Vomiting,...................46
Wearing copper  coin,..............n
White hellebore,................19 
 
J 
 
 
 
9  hbTEDTDD  U"1N
3NI3I03W _o Aavaan ~i\.noii»n
NLM001031948 
